Waist Circumference and Waist-Hip Ratio Report of a WHO Expert Consultation GENEVA, 8–11 DECEMBER 2008 Waist Circumference and Waist–Hip Ratio: Report of a WHO Expert Consultation Geneva, 8–11 December 2008 WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data Waist circumference and waist–hip ratio: report of a WHO expert consultation, Geneva, 8–11 December 2008. 1.Body mass index. 2.Body constitution. 3.Body composition. 4.Obesity. I.World Health Organization. ISBN 978 92 4 150149 1 NLM classification: QU 100 © World Health Organization 2011 All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO web site www.who.int or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, . Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO web site The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters. All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use. Printed by the WHO Document Production Services, Geneva, Switzerland. ii A c k n o w l e d g e m e n ts This meeting report was originally prepared by Dr Prakash Shetty, with support from Professor Shiriki Kumanyika Chairperson of the consultation and Dr Gary Tin‐Choi Ko Rapporteur of the consultation. It was further developed and finalized with substantial support and inputs from Professor Shiriki Kumanyika, Professor Scott Lear, Professor Thorkild Sørensen and Professor Paul Zimmet, and the members of the WHO Secretariat Dr Chizuru Nishida and Dr Francesco Branca. Special acknowledgement is made to all the members of the expert consultation, in particular to those who prepared the background papers for the consultation. WHO is grateful to the European Journal of Clinical Nutrition for accepting and publishing these background papers EJCN, vol 64, No. 1, pp 2–61, January 2010 for wider dissemination. Acknowledgement is also made to the WHO staff from the departments of Nutrition for Health and Development, and Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion, who provided valuable contributions to the consultation. WHO expresses deep appreciation to the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of the Government of Japan for their financial support for the commissioning of the background papers, holding of the expert consultation and production of the meeting report. Technical editing of the report was undertaken by Dr Hilary Cadman from Cadman Editing Services in Australia and cover design was undertaken by Ms Sue Hobbs from Minimum Graphics in New Zealand. iii A b b r e v i a t i o n s a n d a c r o n y m s ATP AUC BMI Adult Treatment Panel area under the receiver operating characteristic curve body mass index Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults CVD FAO FPR IDF NCD cardiovascular disease dual X‐ray absorptiometry Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations false‐positive rate International Diabetes Federation Multi‐Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis noncommunicable disease National Cholesterol Education Program National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute NIH ROC TPR US National Institutes of Health receiver operating characteristic STEPwise Approach to Surveillance WHO Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation true‐positive rate United States WHO World Health Organization iv C o n t e n ts Acknowledgements........................................................................................................... iii Abbreviations and acronyms............................................................................................. iv Introduction........................................................................................................... 1 Methods for measuring waist and hip circumference............................................. 5 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 Placement, tightness and type of measuring tape ..........................................5 Tightness and type of tape..................................................................6 2.1.2 Subject posture and other factors ...................................................................6 Influence of stomach contents at time of measurement ...................6 2.2.4 Measurement error..........................................................................................7 Implications of differences in methodology ....................................................7 Summary and conclusions................................................................................7 Impact of variations in body fat distribution by sex, age and ethnicity ................... 8 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 Sex ....................................................................................................................8 Reproductive status .........................................................................................8 Age ...................................................................................................................9 Ethnicity..........................................................................................................10 3.4.1 Ethnic groups for which waist circumference or waist–hip ratio may reflect more body fat at a given body mass index level ...................................................................................................10 ratio may reflect less body fat at a given body mass index level ...................................................................................................10 3.5 Summary and conclusions..............................................................................10 Relationships of waist circumference and waist–hip ratio to disease risk and mortality....................................................................................................... 12 4.1 Measures of obesity and abdominal obesity and cardiovascular disease risk .....................................................................................................12 4.2 Measures of obesity, abdominal obesity and type 2 diabetes risk................13 v 4.3 4.4 4.5 Measures of obesity and abdominal obesity and all‐cause mortality and mortality from specific causes ................................................................14 Ethnic differences...........................................................................................14 Summary and conclusions..............................................................................15 Ethnic differences..............................................................................16 4.5.5 Summary and conclusions.................................................................................... 19 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 Usefulness of waist circumference and waist–hip ratio for prediction of disease risk ...............................................................................19 Measurement protocol ..................................................................................20 Selecting cut‐off points ..................................................................................21 Universal or population‐specific cut‐off points..............................................22 Recommendations............................................................................................... 24 Annex A: Current uses of waist circumferences and waist–hip ratios, and recommended cut‐off points ............................................................................... 27 Annex B: List of participants............................................................................................. 32 References ....................................................................................................................... 34 vi I n t r o d u c t i o n The World Health Organization WHO Expert Consultation on Waist Circumference and Waist–Hip Ratio was held in Geneva, Switzerland on 8–11 December 2008. The consultation was organized by WHO’s Department of Nutrition for Health and Development, in collaboration with the Department of Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion. It was opened by Dr Ala Alwan, WHO Assistant Director‐General for Noncommunicable Diseases and Mental Health. The consultation was convened as part of WHO's: • efforts in implementing the recommendations made at the WHO Consultation on Appropriate Body Mass Index for Asian Populations ; • response to the emerging problem of obesity and related chronic diseases, in particular in low‐ and middle‐income countries. The 1997 WHO Expert Consultation on Obesity recognized the importance of abdominal fat mass referred to as abdominal, central or visceral obesity, which can vary considerably within a narrow range of total body fat and body mass index BMI. It also highlighted the need for other indicators to complement the measurement of BMI, to identify individuals at increased risk of obesity‐related morbidity due to accumulation of abdominal fat WHO, 2000a. Waist–hip ratio i.e. the waist circumference divided by the hip circumference was suggested as an additional measure of body fat distribution. The ratio can be measured more precisely than skin folds, and it provides an index of both subcutaneous and intra‐ abdominal adipose tissue . The suggestion for the use of proxy anthropometric indicators arose from a 12‐year follow‐up of middle‐aged men, which showed that abdominal obesity measured as waist–hip ratio was associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction, stroke and premature death, whereas these diseases were not associated with measures of generalized obesity such as BMI Larsson et al., 1984. In women, BMI was associated with increased risk of these diseases; however, waist–hip ratio appeared to be a stronger independent risk factor than BMI Lapidus et al., 1984. The 2002 WHO Expert Consultation on Appropriate Body Mass Index for Asian Populations and Its Implications for Policy and Intervention Strategies reviewed the issue of ethnic differences in the meaning of BMI cut‐off values. In populations with a predisposition to central i.e. abdominal or visceral obesity and the related increased risk of developing metabolic syndrome, the consultation recommended that, where possible, waist circumference should be used to refine action levels based on BMI. For example, levels based on BMI might be increased by one level if the waist circumference were elevated above a specified level. The choice of the action level for waist circumference should be based on population‐specific data and health considerations. An expert working group was formed by the 2002 consultation, to start examining data on the relation between waist circumference and morbidity, and on any association between BMI, waist circumference and health risk. The aim was to develop recommendations for using waist measurements to further define risks. WHO’s Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases WHO, 2000b, and the more recent 2008–2013 Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases WHO, 2008a, provide the platform for WHO’s work on noncommunicable diseases NCDs. These publications identified the monitoring of NCDs and their determinants as a key component for: • developing policies; • evaluating the effectiveness and impact of interventions; • assessing the progress made. The Expert Consultation on Waist Circumference and Waist–Hip Ratio contributed to the implementation of the global strategy and NCD action plan. It achieved this by reviewing and updating the waist circumference and waist–hip ratio issues related to diagnostic criteria, classifications and possibly management guidelines for major NCDs. The overall aim of the expert consultation was to review the scientific evidence and make recommendations on the issues related to waist circumference and waist–hip ratio. It focused particularly on issues related to: • methods of measurement; • variations by sex, age and ethnicity; • predicting risks of cardiovascular disease CVD and diabetes, and of overall mortality; • relationship with BMI in predicting disease risks. The specific objectives of the consultation were to: • review the usefulness of waist circumference and waist–hip ratio measures as predictors of NCD risk; • assess operational considerations related to measurement protocols and cut‐off points for public health action; • define potential cut‐off points for public health action; • identify future research needs. To achieve these objectives, six peer‐reviewed background papers were prepared by selected experts in the related fields. The selection of experts, both for the preparation of the background documents and for the actual consultation, followed WHO process and guidelines; as part of the process, all expert participants, peer reviewers and temporary advisors signed a declaration of interests. Where possible, the background papers prepared for the consultation evaluated the strength of the evidence, using modified criteria from the World Cancer Research Fund, as adapted by an earlier joint WHO and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FAO Expert Consultation on Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Disease WHO/FAO, 2003 see Table 1.1, below. Much of the data and many of the study designs did not easily lend themselves to rigorous evaluation based on these criteria. Nevertheless, the criteria were useful to the discussions at the expert consultation, in relation to understanding conclusions on the differences among diverse populations derived from examination of associations between BMI and proxy anthropometric indicators of abdominal fat, and different health outcomes. Table 1.1 Criteria for assessing strength of the evidence of association Convincing evidence • Based on epidemiological studies showing consistent associations between exposure and disease, with little or no evidence to the contrary • Based on a substantial number of studies including prospective observational studies and, where relevant, randomized controlled trials of sufficient size, duration and quality showing consistent effects • Association should be biologically plausible Adapted from WHO/FAO 2003 Probable evidence • Based on epidemiological studies showing fairly consistent associations, but with perceived shortcomings in available evidence or some evidence to the contrary, precluding a more definite judgement • Shortcomings in the evidence may include insufficient duration of trials/studies, insufficient availability of trials/studies, inadequate sample sizes, and incomplete follow-up • Laboratory evidence is usually supportive • Association should be biologically plausible Possible evidence • Based mainly from case–control and cross-sectional studies, and data from insufficient randomized control trials, observational studies, non-randomized control trials and evidence from non-epidemiological studies i.e. clinical and laboratory based • More trials are required to support tentative associations • Association should be biologically plausible This report provides a summary of the discussions of the expert consultation. It includes: • discussion of the methods for measuring waist circumference and waist–hip ratio Chapter 2; • age, sex and ethnic variations in fat distribution Chapter 3; • associations of waist circumference and waist–hip ratio with BMI, and with health outcomes Chapter 4. Chapter 5 presents a summary and conclusions on these different aspects, and discusses approaches and research needs for using measurements of waist circumference and waist– hip ratio. Chapter 6 outlines steps that could be taken to arrive at appropriate WHO recommendations. Annex A contains background information compiled by the WHO Secretariat on existing cut‐off points for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio. These cut‐off points are used to variable extents, some for clinical and diagnostic purposes, others for screening and surveillance for public health purposes. Annex B lists the participants in the consultation. The detailed background papers, together with an overview of the expert consultation, have been published elsewhere Huxley et al., 2010; Lear et al., 2010; Nishida et al., 2010; Qiao & Nyamdorj, 2010a; Qiao & Nyamdorj, 2010b; Seidell, 2010; Stevens et al., 2010. The main findings and key issues identified from these background papers are included in this report. Some of the potential uses of the cut‐off points for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio include: • • surveillance screening • diagnosis and decision to treat in a clinical situation • assessing the value of treatment of an individual • assessing the value of intervention in the community. To use either or both of these measures, the method for selecting cut‐off points to indicate thresholds for risk needs to be specified . The basis for identifying these cut‐off points may be identical for the different measurements or may differ, depending on the purpose for which the cut‐off points are used. The relevance to public health is related to prevention and the prediction of disease burden, rather than the prediction of mortality. As part of an evidence base to inform policy, these measures may be used to assess the need for interventions, and to assess effectiveness of interventions in reducing health risks or associated costs and burdens. c i r c u m f e r e n c e An important issue in using and interpreting waist circumference or waist–hip ratio is the protocol used to obtain the measurements. Also important is the extent to which the measurement protocol varies across studies, and the potential for standardizing these measurements within a study or survey, when taken by different people. Theoretically, differences in measurements protocols across studies could be responsible for variation in the association of these measures with risk factors, or disease or mortality outcomes. Therefore, the expert consultation considered background information on protocols currently in use, and the impact of differences in measurement approaches on measurement error and associations with health outcomes. The aim was to recommend an appropriate protocol for international use. Elements of the protocol discussed below include: • • the anatomical placement of the measuring tape, its tightness and the type of tape used; the subject’s posture, phase of respiration, abdominal tension, stomach contents and clothing. Waist circumference The WHO STEPwise Approach to Surveillance STEPS provides a simple standardized method for collecting, analysing and disseminating data in WHO Member countries. The WHO STEPS protocol for measuring waist circumference instructs that the measurement be made at the approximate midpoint between the lower margin of the last palpable rib and the top of the iliac crest WHO, 2008b. The United States US National Institutes of Health NIH protocol provided in the NIH Practical guide to obesity NHLBI Obesity Education Initiative, 2000 and the protocol used in the US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey NHANES III Westat Inc, 1998 indicate that the waist circumference measurement should be made at the top of the iliac crest. The NIH also provided a protocol for the measurement of waist circumference for the Multi‐Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis MESA study. This protocol indicates that the waist measurement should be made at the level of the umbilicus or navel. However, published reports indicate that measurements of waist circumference made at the level of the umbilicus may underestimate the true waist circumference Croft et al., 1995. Some studies have assessed the waist circumference at the point of the minimal waist Ross et al., 2008. Hip circumference All of the protocols mentioned in Section 2.1.1 indicate that the hip circumference measurement should be taken around the widest portion of the buttocks. The accuracy of waist and hip circumference measurements depends on the tightness of the measuring tape, and on its correct positioning i.e. parallel to the floor at the level at which the measurement is made. The WHO STEPS protocol states that, for both waist and hip, the tape should be snug around the body, but not pulled so tight that it is constricting WHO, 2008b. The protocol also recommends the use of a stretch‐resistant tape that provides a constant 100 g of tension through the use of a special indicator buckle; use of this type of tape reduces differences in tightness. Both the protocol described in NIH Practical guide to obesity NHLBI Obesity Education Initiative, 2000 and the NHANES III protocol Westat Inc, 1998 recommend that the measurements be made with the tape held snugly, but not constricting, and at a level parallel to the floor. The posture of the subject at the time the measurement is taken influences the accuracy of the measurement. Thus, the WHO STEPS protocol recommends that the subject stands with arms at the sides, feet positioned close together, and weight evenly distributed across the feet WHO, 2008b. The NHANES III protocol recommends that the subject be standing erect, with the body weight evenly distributed Westat Inc, 1998. The phase of respiration determines the extent of fullness of the lungs and the position of the diaphragm at the time of measurement; it also influences the accuracy of the waist circumference. The WHO STEPS protocol suggests that the waist circumference should be measured at the end of a normal expiration, when the lungs are at their functional residual capacity WHO, 2008b. The NHANES III protocol states that the waist circumference should be measured at minimal expiration Westat Inc, 1998. The tension of the abdominal wall influences the accuracy of the waist circumference measurement. Lowering the tension of the abdominal wall increases waist circumference, whereas increasing the tension by sucking in reduces waist circumference. Many individuals unconsciously react to waist measurements by sucking in the abdominal wall; hence, a relaxed posture is best for taking waist measurements. The WHO STEPS protocol recommends advising the subject to relax and take a few deep, natural breaths before the actual measurement is made, to minimize the inward pull of the abdominal contents during the waist measurement WHO, 2008b. 2.2.4 Influence of stomach contents at time of measurement The amount of water, food or gas in the gastrointestinal tract will affect the accuracy of the waist measurement. Gibson 1990 suggests that a waist measurement be made after the subject has fasted overnight or is in a fasted state, to reduce this effect. None of the protocols evaluated address this issue, perhaps because it would entail the subject being notified in advance of the measurement, and being present the morning after an overnight fast. Information on the measurement error of the waist circumference and hip circumference has come from studies in adolescents. Lohman et al. 1988 calculated the technical error of waist circumference measurement in adolescents to be 1.31 cm from intrameasurer error and 1.56 cm from intermeasurer error. For hip measurements, the authors calculated the technical error to be 1.23 cm from intrameasurer error and 1.38 from intermeasurer error. 2.4 Implications of differences in methodology There has been no evaluation of the effects of differences in the methods of measurements of waist and hip circumferences on measurement error and on the prediction or estimation of specific adipose tissue depots e.g. abdominal fat. However, a systematic review of circumference with morbidity from CVD and diabetes, and mortality from CVD and all causes Ross, et al., 2008. The review only focused on the anatomical site of placement of the tape for waist circumference measurement. Most protocols measured at the midpoint 36%, umbilical level 28% and minimal waist level 25%. Similar patterns of association were observed between health outcomes and all waist circumference protocols across sample size, sex, age, race and ethnicity. The review concluded that waist circumference measurement protocol had no substantial influence on the association between waist circumference, all‐cause and CVD‐specific mortality, and risk of CVD and diabetes Ross, et al., 2008. Even when the same protocol is used, there may be variability within and between measurers when more than one measurement is made. The experts were uncertain whether these and other issues related to measurement are relevant at either the population or the clinical level, and felt that this may be an important area for inclusion in the future research agenda. Waist circumference should be measured at the midpoint between the lower margin of the least palpable rib and the top of the iliac crest, using a stretch‐resistant tape that provides a constant 100 g tension. Hip circumference should be measured around the widest portion of the buttocks, with the tape parallel to the floor. For both measurements, the subject should stand with feet close together, arms at the side and body weight evenly distributed, and should wear little clothing. The subject should be relaxed, and the measurements should be taken at the end of a normal expiration. Each measurement should be repeated twice; if the measurements are within 1 cm of one another, the average should be calculated. If the difference between the two measurements exceeds 1 cm, the two measurements should be repeated. I m pa c t o f v a r i a t i o n s i n b o d y f a t d i s t r i b u t i o n b y s e x , a g e a n d e t h n i c i t y Commonly used cut‐off points for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio are based on studies undertaken predominantly in populations of European origin. The importance of taking into account ethnic differences in the amount of body fat associated with waist circumference or waist–hip ratio at different BMI levels was a primary motivation for this expert consultation, based on the findings of the 2002 WHO Expert Consultation on Appropriate Body Mass Index for Asian Populations and Its Implications for Policy and Intervention Strategies . The key issue is whether there are systematic differences in the extent to which a given waist circumference or waist–hip ratio level predicts disease outcomes in different ethnic groups, particularly if such differences could lead to underestimation of risk in certain populations. Systematic differences could relate to one or both of the following: • differences in body composition – that is, the relative amounts or types of fat reflected in the waist circumference or waist–hip ratio measurement; • differences in disease risk for a particular body fat profile. Also of interest were variations in body fat distribution that may affect all populations; for example, variations between men and women, and with ageing. This chapter summarizes the issues related to sex, age and ethnic variations. More detailed discussions were provided in the background paper that examined associations between sex, reproductive status and age, and waist circumference Stevens, et al., 2010; and the paper that examined associations between ethnicity and waist circumference Lear, et al., 2010. Sex differences in deposition of body fat are evident even at the foetal stage, but they become much more pronounced during puberty . After adjusting for differences in height, men have greater total lean mass and bone mineral mass, and a lower fat mass than women; these differences continue throughout adult life. Women have substantially more total adipose tissue than men, and these whole‐body sex differences are complemented by major differences in tissue distribution. Men have greater arm muscle mass, larger and stronger bones, less limb fat and a relatively greater central distribution of fat. Women have a more peripheral distribution of fat in early adulthood. Sex differences in body composition are primarily attributable to the action of sex steroid hormones, which drive the dimorphisms during pubertal development. In men, a reduction in free testosterone levels is associated with an increase in fat mass and reduction in muscle mass, and both total and free testosterone levels are inversely associated with obesity Derby et al., 2006. Parity is an important contributor to changes in body composition and body shape in women. Pregnancy is associated with gains in visceral and central adiposity postpartum. Cross‐sectional analysis of data from NHANES III illustrated how parity is associated with changes in body shape Lassek & Gaulin, 2006. Data from 16 325 women showed that women who had given birth had less lower body fat and greater waist circumference. After controlling for age and BMI, increasing parity was associated with lower hip and thigh circumferences, and higher waist circumference. These findings are supported by data over study of women aged 18–30 years Gunderson et al., 2004. Both first and higher order births were associated with increases in waist circumference. Menopause is also associated with an increase in fat mass, and a redistribution of fat to the abdominal area Toth et al., 2000. It is not clear whether such changes are due to hormonal changes or to the ageing process. The Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation SWAN included an ethnically‐diverse cohort of 3064 women, with an average age of 45.9 years. SWAN showed no independent effect of menopause on fat distribution Sternfeld et al., 2004. Over a 3‐year follow‐up, the study showed a mean weight gain of gains that could be attributed to age and physical activity level. Other studies concurred with SWAN, suggesting that, on average, women experience a 0.68 kg per year increase in weight during their 40s and 50s, regardless of menopausal status Macdonald et al., 2003; Wing et al., 1991. To appreciate the effect of ageing on fat distribution, changes in BMI that occur with increasing age need to be considered. Changes in body weight and BMI are strongly related to changes in fat‐free mass, and explain 54% of the variance in those changes . While the associations between BMI and body fat are linear, the association with per cent body fat is curvilinear, with the slope steeper at lower BMIs than at higher BMIs Welch & Sowers, 2000. Per cent body fat may remain constant or increase with age, but ageing is associated with substantial redistribution of fat tissue among depots Cartwright et al., 2007. From late middle age until the 80s or later, there is a decline in the volume of subcutaneous fat, and a redistribution of fat from subcutaneous to visceral depots. This age‐associated decline in the size of adipose depots is accompanied by the accumulation of fat outside adipose tissue in muscle, liver and bone marrow, and loss of lean body mass. Data from NHANES show that waist circumference increases with age, and is larger in older than in younger adults of both sexes up to the age of 70 years Ford et al., 2003. Similarly, in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging, age‐related differences in waist–hip ratio were also reported in all BMI categories examined in both men and women Shimokata et al., 1989. Changes in waist circumference were followed up in Finnish adults 9025 men and also increased over the study period, but the changes were relatively small 1.2% or less per 5‐year period in all but the youngest age category 25–34 years, while increases in waist circumference were seen in every age group. The Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging also examined the effects of weight change on changes in fat distribution Shimokata, et al., 1989. The study found that changes in waist and hip circumferences correlated directly with changes in weight, but there were differences in the pattern of change by sex. In men, waist changes were larger than hip changes, whereas in women they were similar. This resulted in weight changes in men having a larger effect on waist–hip ratio. On average, with a 4.5 kg weight gain, men had a Comparable values for women were 3.3 cm and 3.6 cm, respectively. Interpretation of evidence on ethnic differences is complicated by issues related to defining ethnicity, and other methodological issues that are outlined in the background paper prepared by Lear et al. 2010. The background review only considered studies on populations that were not represented in earlier analyses and that led to recommendations about waist circumference or waist–hip ratio cut‐offs in Europeans. The potential significance of these differences for identifying cut‐off points to predict health outcomes is considered in Chapter 4. more body fat at a given body mass index level Studies investigating body composition and the association with health outcomes in Asian populations have focused on study populations defined as Chinese, Japanese and Korean or South Asian or Indian. However, a number of studies have analysed these ethnic groups as a homogeneous population labelled as “Asians”. These studies found a higher percentage of body fat in Asians at lower BMI Deurenberg‐Yap et al., 2001; Deurenberg‐Yap et al., 2000, as well as an increased prevalence of truncal fat, compared to Caucasians Wu et al., 2007. body fat at a given body mass index level Chinese and South Asian men and women display a greater amount of visceral adipose tissue for a given waist circumference than Europeans Lear et al., 2007b. Similarly, a higher percentage of body fat across a range of waist circumference values has been documented in East Asia Kagawa et al., 2007. In North America, comparisons of Indigenous people and Caucasians have reported no difference in the relationships between visceral adipose tissue and BMI Gautier et al., 1999, total body fat Lear, et al., 2007b or waist circumference Lear et al., 2007a. Australian Aboriginals living in a remote area were reported to have higher waist–hip ratios with lower BMIs than urban Australians of European origin Piers et al., 2003. Compared to European women, black women in South Africa have a slightly lower BMI at a given percentage body fat, but also have less abdominal adipose tissue – as determined by dual X‐ray absorptiometry DEXA – at the same waist circumference Rush et al., 2007. A few small studies report African women as having less visceral adipose tissue than white women Punyadeera et al., 2001a; Punyadeera et al., 2001b; van der Merwe et al., 2000. In Hispanics, one study reported that visceral adipose tissue at a given waist circumference was not appreciably different from that of whites Carroll et al., 2008; Haffner et al., 1996; Nelson et al., 2008. Some studies have reported that Pacific Islanders have larger muscle masses and lower percentage body fat than Europeans at similar BMIs Rush et al., 2004; Rush et al., 2009. In women, this has also been reported for similar waist circumferences and waist–hip ratios Rush, et al., 2007. There is substantial evidence of sex and age variations in waist circumference and waist–hip ratio, and some evidence for ethnic differences. Compared to Europeans, Asian populations have greater visceral adipose tissue, and African populations and, possibly, Pacific Islanders have less visceral adipose tissue or percentage of body fat at any given waist circumference. If higher levels of abdominal fat for a waist circumference or waist–hip ratio level are reflected in associations with health outcomes, then lower thresholds for these indicators might be needed for the affected populations than for European or other reference populations. There is relatively consistent evidence that this situation may apply to Asian populations. Data for Africans and Pacific Islanders are examples of possible indications for a need for higher cut‐offs than those used for European reference populations. However, given that the objective is to predict disease risk, drawing conclusions about cut‐offs solely on the basis of observed risks does not seem appropriate. a n d w a i s t – h i p r a t i o t o d i s e a s e r i s k a n d m o r ta l i t y Both generalized and abdominal obesity are associated with increased risk of morbidity and mortality. The main cause of obesity‐related deaths is CVD, for which abdominal obesity is a predisposing factor. It is unclear which anthropometric measure is the most important predictor of risk of CVD in adults – BMI, waist circumference, waist–hip ratio or even hip circumference. BMI has traditionally been the chosen indicator by which to measure body size and composition, and to diagnose underweight and overweight. However, alternative measures that reflect abdominal adiposity, such as waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and waist– height ratio, have been suggested as being superior to BMI in predicting CVD risk. This is based largely on the rationale that increased visceral adipose tissue is associated with a range of metabolic abnormalities, including decreased glucose tolerance, reduced insulin sensitivity and adverse lipid profiles, which are risk factors for type 2 diabetes and CVD. This chapter summarizes the experts’ discussions on the strength of associations between anthropometric measures and health outcomes. More detailed reviews are provided in several of the background papers Huxley, et al., 2010; Qiao & Nyamdorj, 2010a; Qiao & Nyamdorj, 2010b; Seidell, 2010. One paper examined how waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and BMI perform in predicting and differentiating risks of hypertension, dyslipidaemia and diabetes as major risk factors for CVD, and risks of CVD events Huxley, et al., 2010. The authors reviewed data comparing Asian and Pacific with Caucasian populations, and data on other ethnically diverse study populations. Other studies examined the relative associations of waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and BMI with diabetes risk Qiao & Nyamdorj, 2010a; Qiao & Nyamdorj, 2010b. Seidell 2010 reviewed data on all‐cause mortality, cancer and sleep apnoea in association with waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and BMI, highlighting variations in findings according to choice of indicator, age and BMI status of the population. disease risk Based on an extensive review, Huxley et al. 2010 concluded that there was convincing evidence that measures of general obesity e.g. BMI and measures of abdominal adiposity e.g. waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and waist–height ratio are associated with CVD risk factors and incident CVD events. The authors also concluded that there was probable evidence that: • measures of abdominal obesity are better than BMI as predictors of CVD risk, although combining BMI with these measures may improve their discriminatory capability; • for any given level of BMI, waist circumference or waist–hip ratio, the absolute risk of diabetes or hypertension risk factors for CVD incidence is higher in some population groups than in Caucasian adults; • universal cut‐off points for BMI and waist circumference are not appropriate for use worldwide, given ethnic or population‐specific differences in disease risk for any particular anthropometric measure; however, there may be general consistency in the cut‐off points of waist–hip ratio for predicting CVD risk. The positive association between obesity and the risk of developing type 2 diabetes has been repeatedly observed, both in cross‐sectional studies Hartz et al., 1983; Shaten et al., 1993; Skarfors et al., 1991 and in prospective studies Cassano et al., 1992; Colditz et al., 1990; Ohlson et al., 1985. The consistency of the association across populations – despite differences in measures of fatness and diagnostic criteria for diabetes in adults – reflects the strength of this relationship. The risk of type 2 diabetes in adults increases continuously with increasing obesity, and decreases with weight loss. A careful analysis of the relationship between obesity and adult‐onset diabetes confirms that abdominal obesity is an important risk factor, even after controlling for age, smoking and family history. Since waist circumference correlates more closely with abdominal adipose tissue than BMI, the association between indicators of such obesity e.g. waist circumference and waist–hip ratio has been studied extensively in the last two decades. Qiao & Nyamdorj 2010b concluded that, with respect to type 2 diabetes, all anthropometric measures BMI, waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and waist–height ratio performed similarly in predicting risk. However, data from most of the cross‐sectional studies suggested that waist circumference or waist–hip ratio are better indicators than BMI of the risk of diabetes. The number of prospective studies was limited, and the studies covered only a few ethnic or population groups; thus, the evidence that waist circumference or waist–hip ratio is preferable is neither convincing nor generalizable. The cross‐sectional studies provide only possible association, and the strength of evidence may be considered as possible see Table 1.1. All these studies have provided evidence that either BMI or waist circumference predicted an association with diabetes, and an increased risk of the disease, independent of other factors. Key methodological issues that affected the ability to draw clear conclusions were emphasized by Qiao & Nyamdorj 2010b. In the reviews undertaken, most studies used the “sensitivity and specificity” approach to determine the optimal cut‐off points for anthropometric measures predicting type 2 diabetes risk. Selection of cut‐off points using such an approach is arbitrary, because values are based on analysis of the trade‐offs between sensitivity and specificity. Although a high sensitivity for the waist circumference measurement may be preferred in health promotion to increase public awareness of obesity and diabetes, a high specificity in diagnostic criteria is expected in clinical practice. Thus, the usefulness of waist circumference measurement as a first‐step diagnostic tool when assessing an individual’s risk of diabetes is unclear. Further investigation based on well‐designed prospective studies with incident type 2 diabetes as the outcome would be needed to make recommendations on the use of the waist circumference. Most published studies are cross‐sectional, so the interpretation of results is likely to be confounded by other concurrent conditions such as hypertension and dyslipidaemia. However, the literature review and analysis did confirm that the optimal cut‐off points for indicators of overweight and obesity, and measures of abdominal obesity, vary across different ethnicities and population groups. The findings also supported the view that there is no optimal cut‐off point that can be applied worldwide. The review undertaken by Qiao & Nyamdorj 2010b suggested that country or region‐specific cut‐off points may need to be used, taking into consideration the purpose for which the value is required and the availability of resources. mortality and mortality from specific causes Due to inconsistencies in the literature, controversy continues about the relationship between obesity and overall mortality WHO, 2000a. Some studies have found a U or J‐ shaped association, with higher mortality rates at both the upper and lower weight ranges. Others have shown a gradual and continuous increase in mortality with increasing body weight, or no association at all between body weight and mortality. Many of the studies on obesity and mortality have systemically underestimated the impact of obesity on premature mortality, due to bias in the study design. This bias may be the result of failure to control for smoking, inappropriate control for associated conditions e.g. hypertension, dyslipidaemia and hyperglycaemia, which are essentially comorbidities of obesity, failure to control for weight loss with illness and failure to standardize for age Manson et al., 1987; Seidell et al., 1996. Seidell 2010 concluded that: • waist circumference and waist–hip ratio are both related to increased risk of all‐cause mortality, throughout the range of adult BMIs; • waist circumference and waist–hip ratio are strongly predictive in young and middle‐ aged adults compared to older people and those with low BMI; • waist circumference alone could replace waist–hip ratio and BMI as a single risk factor for all‐cause mortality. However, data are lacking on appropriate cut‐offs for measures of abdominal obesity for predicting risk of all‐cause mortality in ethnic and population groups other than European, North American and Australian white populations. Evidence for use of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio to replace BMI for predicting morbidity related to cancer risk is less strong than for all‐cause mortality. Numerous studies of populations throughout the world have suggested using cut‐off points specific to ethnic groups. This section highlights studies that have evaluated directly or indirectly the potential basis for waist circumference or waist–hip ratio cut‐off points that differ from those proposed for general use and are based on European or Caucasian reference populations. When studies in Asian populations are taken together, Asians appear to have an increased metabolic risk at lower waist circumference and waist–hip ratio than Europeans. This is probably due to higher levels of body fat and abdominal adipose tissue. In particular, those studies that included a European or Caucasian comparison group indicated a lower waist circumference for Asians, and some also suggested a lower waist–hip ratio Diaz et al., 2007; Huxley et al., 2007; 2008. These data indicate a lower waist circumference and waist–hip ratio cut‐off point for Asians; for example, waist circumference values of 85 cm and 80 cm, and waist–hip ratio values of 0.90 and 0.80 for men and women, respectively. Studies in populations residing in the Middle East have provided waist circumference and waist–hip ratio cut‐off points similar to those suggested for Europeans. Only one analysis reported on waist circumference cut‐off points in Africans none investigated waist–hip ratio cut‐off points. That analysis recommended 75.6 cm and 80.5 cm for men, and 71.5 cm and 81.5 cm for women of Nigerian and Cameroon origin, respectively, for the identification of hypertension Okosun et al., 2000a; Okosun et al., 2000b. Given that no other studies have investigated cut‐offs in this population group, there is insufficient evidence for recommending specific cut‐offs for sub‐Saharan Africans. Cut‐off points for waist circumference of 94 cm and 80 cm determined for European men and women, respectively have been associated with a 1.5–2.0 fold increased risk in hypertension, and a 3.9 and 1.6 fold increase in diabetes, in men and women of African origin, respectively Okosun et al., 1998. Findings that African‐Americans tend to be leaner than Europeans are inconsistent with the data indicating that African‐Americans are at increased risk for CVD at a given waist circumference due to higher blood pressure and lipids. Studies investigating specific cut‐off points for African‐Americans either suggested similar cut‐off points to those used for Europeans, based on the limited evidence available, or indicated that there was not enough evidence to set specific cut‐off points for African‐ Americans. Studies investigating South Americans recommended waist circumference cut‐off points of 88–90 cm for men, and 83–84 cm for women Lear, et al., 2010. Three studies reporting on waist–hip ratio indicated a value ranging from 0.85 to 0.95 in men, and from 0.80 to 1.18 in women. These studies suggested that waist circumference cut‐off points should be lower than those for Europeans, but that waist–hip ratio cut‐off points should be similar to those for Europeans. Only one study in Hispanics provided a recommendation for cut‐off points; it suggested a waist circumference of 90 cm for men and 85 cm for women, and a waist–hip ratio of 0.90–0.91 for men and 0.84–0.86 for women Berber et al., 2001. Another study suggested that the current waist circumference cut‐off points based on Europeans provided low sensitivity with respect to metabolic risk factors for the Hispanic population Okosun, et al., 2000a. The overall results of the evaluation of the associations between waist circumference and waist–hip ratio with measures of metabolic diseases and risk factors are summarized in Table 4.1, and presented below. The biological rationale for relating measures of central adiposity to CVD risk is that abdominal adipose tissue which is positively associated with waist circumference and waist–hip ratio is related to a range of metabolic abnormalities. These abnormalities include decreased glucose tolerance, reduced insulin sensitivity and adverse lipid profiles, which are risk factors for type 2 diabetes and CVD. Most anthropometric indicators of abdominal obesity have been derived from predominantly European populations. This has raised issues about the applicability of the recommended cut‐off points to non‐European populations, among whom the problem is currently of much greater concern. Neither is there consensus over which of these measures of central adiposity is most strongly associated with CVD risk, either within or between different ethnic groups. It has been suggested that waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and waist–height ratio, which reflect abdominal adiposity, are superior to BMI in predicting CVD risk. For example, in the INTERHEART case–control study of myocardial infarction in diverse populations in 52 countries Yusuf et al., 2005, BMI, waist circumference and waist–hip ratio were all strongly and linearly associated with risk of myocardial infarction. Relationships with BMI were attenuated by adjustment for waist–hip ratio, but relationships with waist measures were relatively unaffected by adjustment for BMI, indicating the independence of measures of abdominal obesity in predicting risk. However, a combined analysis of the Physicians’ Health Study and the Women’s Health Study found that Gelber et al., 2008: • • the magnitude of associations of BMI, waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and waist– height ratio with CVD risk were similar; these measures were not entirely independent as predictors of risk; • differences according to the measure used were not likely to be clinically significant. In the Asia Pacific Cohort Study, none of the anthropometric indices were clearly associated with stroke outcomes . Overall, these measures seem to be comparable in their discriminatory capability – as assessed by the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve AUC – at identifying those individuals with the highest risk of CVD Huxley, et al., 2010. Data from prospective studies show a wide range of relationships between anthropometric measures and risk of type 2 diabetes; hence, it would be difficult to conclude that measures of abdominal obesity are always superior to BMI in predicting risk. However, most of the cross‐sectional studies showed that the AUC was slightly larger for waist circumference or waist–hip ratio than for BMI. This review suggests that, at any given level of body size, the prevalence of hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidaemia is higher in Asian than in non‐Asian populations. It also suggests that no anthropometric measure is more strongly associated with blood pressure, plasma glucose, diabetes and lipid levels than any other measure. However, BMI appears to be less informative than other measures. The evidence with regard to anthropometric measures – in particular waist circumference or waist–hip ratio measures and all‐cause mortality – is predominantly from white European and American adults, both in young and middle‐aged adults and older people. Few studies have examined African and Asian populations. When waist circumference was adjusted for BMI, the relationship appears J‐shaped to almost linear. Overall, the data suggested that, for a given combination of BMI and waist circumference or waist–hip ratio measures, the risk is higher for Asians for all disease outcomes; however, it was not possible to draw definitive conclusions, due to limitations of the data. Only in populations of Asian descent were differences in risk sufficient to warrant consideration of alternative cut‐off points. The multiple causality and impact of the nutrition transition may also contribute to the interpretation of apparent ethnic differences. Specifically, the impact of exposure to undernutrition including gestational exposure to maternal undernutrition on subsequent weight gain and fat deposition was noted as a possible factor contributing to differences among populations. A rising relative risk of disease along the continuum of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio was also evident. However, the absolute risk currently determined by the multiple risk factors associated with body fat and its distribution may well reflect the phase of disease transition in a population. Hence, the thresholds for risk associated with waist circumference or waist–hip ratio may vary with time. These considerations make it difficult to specify cut‐off points on the basis of ethnicity. Table 4.1 Summary of the associations of body mass index, waist circumference, waist–hip ratio and waist–height ratio with disease risk Body mass index Waist Waist–hip ratio circumference Waist–height ratio Remarks and major references R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f CVD risk ++ Convincing ++++ Convincing ++++ Convincing +++ Convincing de Koning et al. 2007 APCSC 2006 Yusuf et al. 2005 Gelber et al. 2008 Zhu et al. 2005 Convincing +++ Convincing +++ Convincing +++ Convincing Lee et al. 2008b ++ / / +++ Probable +++ Probable / +++ Convincing +++ Convincing +++ Convincing / / / WHO 2008b Vazquez et al. 2007 +++ Convincing ++++ Convincing ++++ Convincing ++++ Convincing Huxley et al. 2007 Huxley et al. 2008 Nyamdorj et al. 2008b Qiao & Nyamdorj 2010b +++ Convincing +++ Convincing +++ Convincing +++ Convincing Wolf & Colditz 1998 James et al. 2004 Huxley et al. 2007 Huxley et al. 2008 Nyamdorj et al. 2008b Overall CVD risk factors mainly cross- sectional data CVD risk factors from STEPS analysis presented in the WHO meeting Type 2 diabetes mellitus prospective studies Type 2 diabetes mellitus cross-sectional studies Hypertension mainly cross- sectional data +++ Overall mortality without mutual adjustment of the anthropometric parameters 0/– Overall mortality with mutual adjustment of the Convincing +++ Convincing +++ Convincing +++ Convincing Koster et al. 2008 Zhang et al. 2008 Welborn & Dhaliwal 2007b Remarks: Some studies showed J- shape relationship with BMI, especially elderly people Dolan et al., 2007; Katzmarzyk et al., 2002 Evidence is less consistent in elderly people Baik et al., 2000; Price et al., 2006 Kalmijn et al. 1999 Pischon et al. 2008 ++++ Convincing ++++ Convincing Probable / / Body mass index Waist Waist–hip ratio circumference Waist–height ratio Remarks and major references R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f R e l a t i o n s h p i e v i d e n c e a S t r e n g t h o f +++ Convincing ++ Convincing ++ Convincing NR NR Bigaard et al. 2003 Moghaddam et al. 2007 Harvie et al. 2003 + Possible + Possible + Possible NR NR AICR 2007 anthropometric parameters Cancer – colorectum, breast post-menopause Cancer – pancreas, endometrium, cervix, kidney, gallbladder APCSC, Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration; BMI, body mass index; CVD, cardiovascular disease; FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; NR, not reported; STEPS, STEPwise Approach to Surveillance; WHO, World Health Organization Levels of evidence are based on the report of the joint WHO/FAO expert consultation WHO/FAO, 2003 see Table 3.1 of that report Relationship: + to ++++ = positive association, mild to strong; 0/– = negative association, nil to mild a Definitions of the strength of evidence are based on those that were used by the 2002 joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation on diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases WHO/FAO, 2003 b References with evidence on waist–height ratio The aim of the expert consultation was to provide guidance that WHO could use to develop recommendations and ultimately provide guidelines for the effective use of specific cut‐off points for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio. Making definitive decisions on actual cut‐off points was outside the scope of the consultation. However, the expert consultation was asked to advise WHO on how the process of developing actual cut‐off points could be moved forward, and to identify any gaps in the data. This chapter summarizes the potential usefulness and relative advantages of: • waist circumference versus waist–hip ratio, with or without accompanying BMI measurements; • measurement protocols for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio; • methods for selecting cut‐off points; • considerations for determining the need for population‐specific cut‐off points. prediction of disease risk The fundamental question of whether waist circumference and waist–hip ratio are useful measures for predicting disease risk was answered with convincing evidence. An increase in both of these indices is associated with increased disease risk, and this association is evident in diverse populations, although most of the data were derived from populations of European descent. Waist circumference and waist–hip ratio as measures of abdominal obesity were correlated with BMI, but the level of association varied, suggesting that these measures may provide different information and thus may not be interchangeable. Practical considerations appeared to favour the use of waist circumference as an alternative to BMI. For example, waist circumference may be justified when measuring the waist is easier and more accurate than measuring weight and height. Measuring hip circumference may be more difficult than measuring waist circumference alone; this could limit the potential use of waist–hip ratio as an alternative to either waist circumference alone or BMI. In assessing the complementarity of BMI and waist measures, the main issue was whether there was a substantial gain in information when using both measures, as suggested in the NIH Practical guide to obesity Table 5.1 and the International Diabetes Federation IDF guidelines Table 5.2. This also raised some more general issues: • the extent to which the range of waist circumference depends on body size; • whether differences in the waist circumference distribution in populations with different body sizes may create problems in arriving at appropriate cut‐off points that would be similarly sensitive to health risk in all populations e.g. the NIH Practical guide to obesity suggests that waist circumference cut‐offs are only useful up to a BMI of 35, after which most individuals will exceed the cut‐off points. Due to the relative ease of obtaining waist circumference, its use is favoured over waist–hip ratio. There was insufficient data on other proxy measures e.g. waist–height ratio, to suggest giving other measures any priority at present. Although BMI and abdominal adiposity measures may be highly correlated, it is desirable to obtain a BMI, where possible, and consider the utility of joint use of the two indicators. Table 5.1 Combined recommendations of body mass index and waist circumference cut-off points made for overweight or obesity, and association with disease risk Body mass index Obesity class Disease risk relative to normal weight and waist circumference Men 102 cm Women 88 cm Men 102 cm Women 88 cm Underweight Normal Overweight Obesity Extreme obesity 18.5 18.5–24.9 25.0–29.9 30.0–34.9 35.0–39.9 40.0 I II Increased High Very high Extremely high High Very high Very high Extremely high Source: NHLBI Obesity Education Initiative 2000 Table 5.2 International Diabetes Federation criteria for ethnic or country-specific values for waist circumference Country or ethnic group Sex Europid South Asian Chinese Japanese Men Women Men Women Men Women Men Women Source: Adapted from Zimmet & Alberti 2006 Waist circumference cm 94 80 90 80 90 80 90 80 It was relatively straightforward to determine the recommended protocol for the standardized measurement of waist circumference and hip circumference, and for the assessment of abdominal obesity. There are many potential points of variation in how these measurements can be taken, and many potential sources of measurement error among and within measurers. Nevertheless, the consultation agreed that the measurement protocol previously approved by WHO should be recommended. This protocol is in extensive use by STEPS, and has been featured in several previous WHO expert meeting reports WHO, 1995; WHO, 2000a; WHO/FAO, 2003. This protocol can be summarized as outlined below. • Measure the waist circumference at the end of several consecutive natural breaths, at a level parallel to the floor, midpoint between the top of the iliac crest and the lower margin of the last palpable rib in the mid axillary line. • Measure the hip circumference at a level parallel to the floor, at the largest circumference of the buttocks. • Make both measurements with a stretch‐resistant tape that is wrapped snugly around the subject, but not to the point that the tape is constricting. Keep the tape level and parallel to the floor at the point of measurement. • Ensure that the subject is standing upright during the measurement, with arms relaxed at the side, feet evenly spread apart and body weight evenly distributed. The experts generally agreed that the basis for effective use of waist circumference and waist–hip ratio cut‐off points in clinical and public health should relate to health outcomes rather than to associations with intra‐abdominal fat, because risk prediction is more straightforward if based on health outcomes. Other issues that need to be considered are outlined below: • Which health outcome or outcomes should be used? • Should outcome measures from cross‐sectional data be used? – Although use of cross‐ sectional data is practical, the data may be confounded by effects of existing disease and its diagnosis and treatment on risk status or associations. A clear preference was stated for outcomes from longitudinal data, which avoid the bias associated with relying on prevalent cases. • Are relative risks or absolute risks preferable when comparing risk factor or disease levels at different levels of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio? – Relative risks the outcome in those with waist circumference or waist–hip ratio above a given cut‐off point compared to the outcome in those below the cut‐off point vary, depending on the reference category used to calculate the ratio; thus, they do not necessarily reflect the disease burden on an absolute scale. Absolute risks the difference, by subtraction, in disease burden among those with waist circumference or waist–hip ratio above or below a specified cut‐off point may be more relevant from a policy perspective. This situation may be particularly relevant to the issue of ethnic differences. A high baseline disease rate will decrease ratios relative to populations with lower baseline rates, but will not influence the calculation of risk differences. • Would linking waist circumference or waist–hip ratio measures to overall body size or generalized obesity grades e.g. by using BMI categories add valuable information within populations, within a given range of body size, or across population subgroups with substantially different BMI distributions? – This question could be answered by analysing potential differences in the range and distribution of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio in populations with different BMI range and distribution. For example, such analyses might compare waist circumference and waist–hip ratio distributions and health outcomes in Asian populations in whom mean BMI levels are relatively low with European or other populations in whom mean BMI levels are relatively high, to determine whether one set of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio cut‐off points would be sufficiently sensitive in both populations. The performance of measures such as waist circumference and waist–hip ratio, used in conjunction with BMI, might contribute to the development of composite indices for use with individuals and the community. • Should cut‐off points be determined using statistical approaches such as receiver operating characteristic ROC curves; if so, how should such approaches be used? – With respect to the use of ROC curves, questions included whether to choose cut‐off points on the basis of the maximum level of sensitivity identified, likelihood ratios or equivalence of sensitivity to specificity, and whether to resort to an arbitrarily designated level of sensitivity e.g. 85% as criteria for cut‐off values. As indicated in Annex A, all of these measures are currently in use by various countries. The consultation did not identify a basis for giving priority to a particular approach. In addition, potential limitations of the ROC method were noted, including differences in cut‐off points based on differences in population characteristics e.g. average body size or disease prevalence. All these questions need to be carefully considered when determining the method and process used to derive cut‐off points for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio for recommendation by WHO. The choice of method and the process to be outlined will also depend on the potential uses of the derived cut‐off points and health‐relevant policy considerations. For example, specific problems of the population group for which the cut‐ off points are to be used should be taken into account. The issue of sex‐specific cut‐off points was not deliberated as such, but the consultation noted that many countries or settings currently specify different cut‐off points for men and women see Annex A. The experts did not identify evidence for discontinuing the use of sex‐specific cut‐off points. With respect to ethnicity‐specific cut‐off points, there was substantial evidence of population‐dependent variations in association of disease risk with measures of abdominal obesity. However, other evidence discouraged the development and use of ethnically based cut‐off points. The populations of greatest interest in this respect are of Asian descent, because risks of certain diseases e.g. diabetes are notably higher in these populations than would be expected from their mean BMI levels. Understanding the basis for this increased risk of diabetes among Asian populations, for instance, would be important to identify the potential environmental variations and the heterogeneity among populations designated as Asian. The consultation identified the need for a transparent and methodologically sound empirical approach to developing population or geography‐specific cut‐off points for abdominal obesity. At the same time, the experts recognized the utility of the current recommended cut‐off points, which are simple and universally applicable. The background paper by Lear and colleagues 2010 provided examples of how it might be possible to set cut‐off points that are generally applicable, but also recognize the differences in risk among populations. However, there were too many unresolved issues for the consultation to determine whether this process would be useful. The consultation identified many challenges related to the use of surrogate measures of abdominal obesity for the derivation of universally applicable cut‐off points for health outcomes. For example, there are inherent challenges related to determination of health outcomes, including sex differences; age‐related changes in body composition and conformation; and group, population and geographical differences. Some of these confounders need to be evaluated more carefully, as outlined below: • In individuals of the same sex and age anywhere in the world, is the same level, proportion or quantity of: – – total fat or adipose tissue present for a given BMI? intra‐abdominal or visceral adipose tissue present for a given waist circumference or waist–hip ratio? • In individuals of the same sex and age anywhere in the world, is the risk of disease and mortality the same for a given BMI i.e. level of obesity, or waist circumference or waist–hip ratio i.e. level of abdominal obesity? • • Is the relationship between adiposity and the proxy measure, and the association with a given health risk, the same for both sexes? Is the relationship between adiposity and the proxy measure, and the association with a given health risk, affected by increasing age for both sexes? Addressing these issues will be a major challenge. It is clear from the data reviewed at this expert consultation and from previous WHO publications that the current evidence base cannot answer these questions. Further studies are needed to determine whether recommended cut‐off points should be specific to sex, age and population. The expert consultation agreed that the anthropometric indicators and measures used previously i.e. BMI, waist circumference and waist–hip ratio are predictive of the risk of chronic disease. Hence, any waist circumference and waist–hip ratio cut‐off points developed following the process recommended by the consultation could be used alone or in conjunction with BMI. Ideally, the characteristics associated with the most useful analyses for one or more uses of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio would be that: • the data are representative of all population groups with respect to age, sex, social class and concurrent diseases in countries from all regions; • data collected include anthropometric measures of both central adiposity and BMI and at least three risk factors e.g. blood pressure, blood glucose and cholesterol; • standardized methods were used for measurement of waist circumference and other anthropometric indicators; • measured weight and height were available and were not self‐reported data; • • the dataset include information on characteristics such as age, sex and demographics; sufficient longitudinal data from appropriate populations be available, with high quality follow‐up of disease status along the time course, to permit confirmation of key conclusions about cut‐off points derived using cross‐sectional data. Given the data available, the consultation felt that the steps presented below which are not in any specific order could be taken to arrive at appropriate WHO recommendations in this critical area: • Determine whether multiple sets of cut‐off points will be needed e.g. by sex, body size or health‐status characteristics of the population. This could be accomplished by evaluating similarities or differences in the associations of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio with various health outcomes, across populations or population subgroups. The approach would compare populations that differ in distributions of waist circumference and waist–hip ratio, or in disease profiles. Type 2 diabetes should be considered as a major health risk factor or outcome in evaluating associations with waist circumference and waist–hip ratio. In populations throughout the world, diabetes apparently increases with overall and abdominal fat gain and obesity development. Comparisons based on diabetes would allow identification of the potential variations in the predictive potential of various cut‐off points. • For any set of cut‐off points to be developed, choose the most sound and policy‐ relevant statistical approach to determine cut‐off points for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio, and specify the resulting decision rules. • Develop a schema with different levels of risk and three sets of cut‐off points.This could be achieved by linking datasets to diabetes prevalence for countries, and examining whether the recommended cut‐off points are appropriate for the reliable identification of disease risk. In addition, it would be helpful to analyse populations with high risk, to ensure that the cut‐off points developed are a sensitive measure of risk. • Alternatively, choose a set of three indicative risk factors e.g. high blood pressure, elevated cholesterol and elevated blood glucose, whereby a population or group could be identified by waist circumference cut‐off points as having one of three levels of risk: – – – Level I: Minimal risk – At this cut‐off point, less than 10% of people would have any one of the three indicative risk factors; hence, this would be the lowest level of risk. The objective is to identify a value that national governments could use for surveillance and to determine the need for public health interventions. Level II: Moderate risk – At this cut‐off point, there would be a high probability that 80% of people have at least one of the three indicative risk factors, in which case, giving health advice or other appropriate action would be deemed essential. The suggestion was to examine combined datasets bearing in mind global variation, to judge whether it was possible to arrive at a universal cut‐off point to indicate this level of population risk. Issues to consider would be the effects of using 80% as the basis for Level II classification, and whether this value would have the same utility across population groups. Critical analysis of the data should ultimately enable WHO to create a scheme to derive cut‐off points tailored for different purposes. Level III: Substantial or high risk – At this cut‐off point, everyone in the population group would be almost certain to have at least one of the three indicative risk factors. This determination would be based on national or regional datasets that suggest that the individuals in this group will have a doubling of risk compared to low‐risk groups. High‐risk groups may include subgroups or populations defined by obesity or diabetes prevalence. • The question of how to cope with transitions in disease risk also needs to be addressed. Associations of waist circumference or waist–hip ratio with risk factors and diseases may change over time in populations in which incidence of obesity‐related diseases is increasing in association with social and economic transitions. To facilitate the implementation of the proposed next step and carry this process forward, the consultation formed a working group of experts in this area to work closely with WHO.1 The working group comprises academic researchers, clinicians who have expertise in this field, statisticians and data analysts. The working group will also consider gaps in the available global data and items appropriate for future research. The consultation recommended that the working group be asked to develop and suggest the appropriate methods and criteria for a process for open and transparent analysis and clarification of the relationships between abdominal fat distribution and its measures, and disease risk and health outcomes. It was agreed that the working group needs access to a wide range of databases worldwide, including the STEPS data within WHO. The consultation recommended that the working group be assisted to gain access to the available datasets. The consultation urged WHO to view this matter as being of utmost urgency, and to enable completion of the task within a 2‐year period. The ultimate recommendations from WHO will depend on whether WHO can obtain representative datasets to permit systematic overtaken by the new guideline development process implemented by WHO as of 1 January 2009. During 2011–2012, the WHO Nutrition Guidance Expert Advisory Group NUGAG will take forward the follow-up action recommended by the expert consultation, through its subgroup on Diet and Health. analysis of all the issues raised in the consultation. Ultimate recommendations from WHO need to take into consideration: • • the various waist circumference and waist–hip ratio criteria that are already in use by national governments, and by national and international medical organizations; the potential policy and practical implications associated with any attempts to align diverse cut‐offs. On the other hand, timely and authoritative guidance is needed to ensure that measures that can guide appropriate public health and clinical actions on the problems related to NCDs are brought into full use as quickly as possible. NCDs are rapidly increasing worldwide, particularly in low‐ and middle‐income countries. A n n e x A : C u r r e n t u s e s o f w a i s t c i r c u m f e r e n c e s a n d w a i s t – h i p r a t i o s , a n d r e c o m m e n d e d c u t - o f f p o i n ts A1 Recommendations from different organizations World Health Organization A number of WHO publications make recommendations for waist circumference and waist– hip ratio. Recommendations about abdominal obesity and waist circumference have been made as one of the components of metabolic syndrome in a report on diabetes mellitus , under the definition of metabolic syndrome. According to this report, the working definition of metabolic syndrome is a condition characterized by “glucose intolerance, IGT impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes mellitus, and/or insulin resistance together with two or more components listed below”, which includes abdominal obesity in addition to raised arterial pressure, raised plasma triglycerides and microalbuminuria. Abdominal obesity is further defined as waist–hip ratio above 0.90 for males and above 0.85 for females, or a BMI above 30.0. The more recent report of the WHO Expert Consultation on Obesity 2000a stated the “need to develop sex‐specific waist circumference cut‐off points appropriate for different populations”. That report provides a table as an example of sex‐specific waist circumference and risk of metabolic complications associated with obesity in Caucasians. The table is based on the increased relative risk observed in the Netherlands from a random sample of 2183 men and 2698 women aged 20–59 years Han et al., 1995. The recommended sex‐specific cut‐off points are 94 cm men and 80 cm women for increased risk, and 102 cm men and 88 cm women for substantially increased risk. Based on these two WHO reports, the recommendations often attributed to WHO are shown in Table A1 although those sex‐specific cut‐off points cited in the report of the WHO Expert Consultation on Obesity 2000b were an example only and not WHO recommendations. Table A1 World Health Organization cut-off points and risk of metabolic complications Indicator Waist circumference Waist circumference Waist–hip ratio M, men; W, women Cut-off points 94 cm M; 80 cm W 102 cm M; 88 cm W ≥0.90 cm M; ≥0.85 cm W Risk of metabolic complications Increased Substantially increased Substantially increased International Diabetes Federation The International Diabetes Federation IDF has also provided recommendations for cut‐offs for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio IDF, 2006; Zimmet & Alberti, 2006. The recommendations of IDF for waist circumference are not only sex specific, but are also population and geography specific. Values are shown in Table A2. Table A2 International Diabetes Federation cut-off points for different ethnic groups Europids South Asians, Chinese and Japanese Men 94 cm 90 cm Women 80 cm 80 cm United States National Cholesterol Education Program Another set of recommendations widely used are the ones recommended by the experts of the Adult Treatment Panel ATP APT III, 2001 under the aegis of the National Cholesterol Education Program NCEP of the NIH’s National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. The NCEP recommends a single set of sex‐specific cut‐offs, of above 102 cm for men and above 88 cm for women. Other countries An analysis conducted by WHO as part of the preparations for the expert consultation showed that some countries adhered to one or the other of the three recommendations mentioned above, whereas others had their own specific recommendations. For example, many countries use the WHO cut‐off points; South Africa uses the IDF recommendations; and the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia and Turkey use the IDF recommendations plus other specified sources. The NCEP recommendations are used by Ecuador, Greece, Italy, Jordan, Thailand, Turkey and the US, with several of these countries also using other sources of recommendations. Saudi Arabia, Singapore and Slovakia,use both the IDF and the NCEP recommendations. There is little information on the endorsement of waist circumference and waist–hip ratio cut‐off points at national level by national ministries of health. However, the most popular cut‐off points used worldwide were the ones attributed to two reports from WHO WHO, 1999; WHO, 2000a. The IDF recommendations and the NCEP cut‐off points were frequently used in research or national surveys in many countries. However, the rationale for the choice and use of a specific recommendation was often unknown and unclear. Several other countries have developed their own recommendations and cut‐off points. However, some of these are simply suggested or used in specific populations in published studies, rather than being national recommendations. Some examples are provided in the following section. A2 Rationale for selection of cut-off points The most common approach to determining cut‐off points is based on the use of sensitivity and specificity as interpreted from receiver operating characteristic ROC curves. Sensitivity measures the proportion of actual positives correctly identified as such, and specificity measures the proportion of actual negatives correctly identified as such. In any test, there is usually a trade‐off between optimizing sensitivity and optimizing specificity. This can be represented graphically using a ROC curve see Figure A1 , which is a plot of the true‐positive rate TPR, or sensitivity against the false‐positive rate FPR, or 1 – specificity. Useful cut‐off points are those that provide for a high proportion of true positives while giving a low proportion of false positives. A ROC curve is also known as a “relative operating characteristic” curve, because it compares two operating characteristics TPR and FPR as the criterion changes. Thus, ROC is directly related to diagnostic decision‐making. There are limitations to using a ROC approach for choosing a single cut‐off point e.g. to designate a “high waist circumference”, particularly if the intent is to choose a single cut‐ off point that is applicable across difference populations and survey conditions. The ROC approach should take into account the validity, reliability and reproducibility of the test or criterion measure e.g. the waist measurement, and the prevalence of the condition of interest e.g. high blood pressure or diabetes in the population to be screened. Population prevalence is important because the predictive value e.g. the probability of having a disease given a positive test result is higher in populations with a high prevalence of the disease compared to populations with a low prevalence. This would apply to differences in disease prevalence both across and within populations e.g. if only high‐risk individuals are selected for screening, as opposed to the population at large. Measurement errors also reduce the utility of ROC curves. Figure A1 Example of a ROC curve 1–specificity false-positive probability Source: WHO 2003: p 40 Below are examples of how these concepts have been used as the rationale for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio cut‐off points in different countries. Sensitivity is equal to specificity Table A3 shows examples of studies from different countries that have set cut‐off points based on sensitivity being equal to specificity. Table A3 Cut-off points based on sensitivity being equal to specificity Country Barbados China Islamic Republic of Iran Islamic Republic of Iran Mexico Mexico Mexico Mexico Cut-off point Waist circumference for general risk Waist circumference for obesity, diabetes, and CVD risk Waist circumference for CVD for those at risk of CVD but requiring only life style change Waist circumference for CVD for those at high risk for CVD events, requiring immediate intervention for CVD prevention Diabetes and Waist–hip ratio Waist circumference for diabetes Waist circumference for hypertension Men Women Reference Okosun, et al., 2000b Notes 80–85 cm 75–80 cm Wildman et al., 2004 In this range, the sensitivity equaled the specificity Delavari et al., 2009; Esteghamati et al., 2009; Mirmiran et al., 2004 0.90 Berber, et al., 2001 0.85 Berber, et al., 2001 93–98 cm 94–99 cm Sanchez-Castillo et al., 2003 92–96 cm 93–96 cm Sensitivity equals specificity based on the ROC technique, from a study in a hospital population in Mexico City These national recommendations are based on the intersection of lines of specificity and sensitivity CVD, cardiovascular disease; ROC, receiver operating characteristic Maximum sensitivity A study from France provided cut‐off points for the most corpulent 30% of the population Balkau et al., 2006: • waist circumference for obesity, diabetes, and CVD: 96 cm for men and 83 cm for women; • waist–hip ratio for general risk and obesity: 0.96 for men and 0.83 for women. Sensitivity was of paramount importance, with waist circumference sensitivities of 74% for men and 82% for women, and for waist–hip ratio of 66% for men and 77% for women. Optimal sensitivity and specificity A study from Chile, for example, provided cut‐off points for CVD and metabolic risk for women: a waist circumference of at least 87.7 cm and a waist–hip ratio of at least 0.84 Koch et al., 2008. Specific cut‐off points were based on optimal sensitivity and specificity for detecting one or more cardiovascular and metabolic risk factors in the population under study. Shortest distance between any point on the ROC curve and top-left corner on the y-axis A study from Oman provided cut‐off points for CVD as follows Al‐Lawati & Jousilahti, 2008: • waist circumference: 80 cm for men and 84.5 cm for women; • waist–hip ratio: 0.91 for both men and women. Separate ROC curves were plotted for waist circumference and waist–hip ratio. Range of values and best cut-off points for multiple indicators A study from Tunisia provided a cut‐off point for waist circumference for obesity, diabetes, and CVD of 85 cm for both men and women, based on sensitivity being equal to specificity Bouguerra et al., 2007. However, the study also provided individual cut‐off points for each disease risk, and would clearly be applicable for clinical use whereas the single value given above would be useful for public health purposes: • • for men: 82 cm hypertension; 83 cm glycaemia; 87 cm diabetes; 85 cm total cholesterol and triglycerides; for women: 81 cm hypertension; 82 cm glycaemia; 87 cm diabetes; 83 cm total cholesterol and triglycerides. A3 Summary Cut‐off points chosen vary considerably between countries; also, the variation is greater for waist circumference than for waist–hip ratio. The cut‐off points appear to be chosen based on disease risk e.g. CVD, type 2 diabetes and risk factors of CVD and on hard outcomes such as mortality. Rationales vary, but are generally based on indices of sensitivity and specificity. In some cases, there are multiple specific cut‐off points for different diseases or risk factors. In addition to the above examples, some countries e.g. Japan have based their cut‐off points on assessment of visceral adipose tissue from computerized tomography – that is, the extent to which measurements predict intra‐abdominal fat rather than disease risk – and DEXA Ito et al., 2003. A n n e x B : L i s t o f pa r t i c i pa n ts This annex lists the participants at the WHO Expert Consultation on Waist Circumference and Waist–Hip Ratio, Geneva, Switzerland, 8–11 December 2008. B1 Members2 Professor Sir George Alberti, SCMS Diabetes Research Group, The Medical School, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom Professor Fereidoun Azizi, Director, Research Institute for Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran Professor Juliana CN Chan, Director, Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes and Obesity, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Professor Rachel Huxley, Director, Nutrition & Lifestyle Division, The George Institute for Global Health, Camperdown, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia Professor Philip James, International Obesity Task Force, London, United Kingdom Professor Takashi Kadowaki, Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan Professor Kay‐Tee Khaw, Department of Clinical Gerontology, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom Dr Gary Tin‐Choi Ko, Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes and Obesity, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, The Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Rapporteur Professor Shiriki Kumanyika, Center for Clinical Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, US Chairperson Professor Scott Lear, School of Kinesiology, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada Professor Jean Claude Mbanya, Vice Dean/Professor of Medicine and Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé, Yaoundé, Cameroon Dr Qing Qiao, Academy Research Fellow, Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland Professor K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi, India Professor Jaap Seidell, Head, Department of Nutrition & Health, Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, Free University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Foundation, Indian Council of Medical Research ICMR Advanced Centre for Genomics of Diabetes, Chennai, India Professor Thorkild IA Sørensen, Institute Director and Professor of Clinical Epidemiology, Institute of Preventive Medicine, Centre for Health and Society, Copenhagen, Denmark Professor June Stevens, Chair, Department of Nutrition, Schools of Public Health and Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, US Professor Paul Zimmet, Emeritus Director and Director of International Research, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Caulfield, Victoria, Australia B2 Secretariat Dr Ala Alwan, Assistant Director‐General, Noncommunicable Diseases and Mental Health, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Francesco Branca, Director, Nutrition for Health and Development, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Chizuru Nishida, Scientist, Country focused nutrition policies and programmes, Nutrition for Health and Development, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Jonathan Siekmann, Technical Officer, Country focused nutrition policies and programmes, Nutrition for Health and Development, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Prakash Shetty, Temporary Advisor, Country focused nutrition policies and programmes, Nutrition for Health and Development, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Elaine Rush, Consultant, Country focused nutrition policies and programmes, Nutrition for Health and Development, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Ms Ying Liu, Technical Assistant, Country focused nutrition policies and programmes, Nutrition for Health and Development, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Fiona Adshead, Director, Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Timothy Armstrong, Coordinator, Surveillance and Population‐based Prevention, Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Mr Godrey Xuereb, Technical Officer, Surveillance and Population‐based Prevention, Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Mrs Leanne Riley, Scientist, Surveillance and Population‐based Prevention, Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Shanthi Mendis, Coordinator, Chronic Diseases Prevention and Management, Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland Dr Gojka Roglic, Medical Officer, Chronic Diseases Prevention and Management, Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland R e f e r e n c e s AICR. Food, nutrition, physical activity, and the prevention of cancer: A global perspective. Washington, DC, World Cancer Research Fund WCRF/American Institute for Cancer Research AICR, 2007. Al‐Lawati JA, Jousilahti P. Body mass index, waist circumference and waist‐to‐hip ratio cut‐off points for categorisation of obesity among Omani Arabs. Public Health Nutrition, 2008, 111:102‐ 108. APCSC. Central obesity and risk of cardiovascular disease in the Asia Pacific Region. Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2006, 153:287‐292. APT III. Third report of the expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults, Adult Treatment Panel APT III. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 2001. Baik I, Ascherio A, Rimm EB et al. Adiposity and mortality in men. American Journal of Epidemiology, 2000, 1523:264‐271. Balkau B, Sapinho D, Petrella A et al. Prescreening tools for diabetes and obesity‐associated dyslipidaemia: comparing BMI, waist and waist hip ratio. The D.E.S.I.R. Study. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2006, 603:295‐304. Berber A, Gomez‐Santos R, Fanghanel G et al. Anthropometric indexes in the prediction of type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension and dyslipidaemia in a Mexican population. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2001, 2512:1794‐1799. Bigaard J, Tjonneland A, Thomsen BL et al. Waist circumference, BMI, smoking, and mortality in middle‐aged men and women. Obesity Research, 2003, 117:895‐903. Bjorntorp P. Fat cell distribution and metabolism. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1987, 499:66‐72. Bouguerra R, Alberti H, Smida H et al. Waist circumference cut‐off points for identification of abdominal obesity among the Tunisian adult population. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, 2007, 96:859‐868. Carroll JF, Chiapa AL, Rodriquez M et al. Visceral fat, waist circumference, and BMI: impact of race/ethnicity. Obesity Silver Spring, 2008, 163:600‐607. Cartwright MJ, Tchkonia T, Kirkland JL. Aging in adipocytes: potential impact of inherent, depot‐ specific mechanisms. Experimental Gerontology, 2007, 426:463‐471. Cassano PA, Rosner B, Vokonas PS et al. Obesity and body fat distribution in relation to the incidence of non‐insulin‐dependent diabetes mellitus. A prospective cohort study of men in the normative aging study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 1992, 13612:1474‐1486. Colditz GA, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ et al. Weight as a risk factor for clinical diabetes in women. American Journal of Epidemiology, 1990, 1323:501‐513. Croft JB, Keenan NL, Sheridan DP et al. Waist‐to‐hip ratio in a biracial population: measurement, implications, and cautions for using guidelines to define high risk for cardiovascular disease. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 1995, 951:60‐64. de Koning L, Merchant AT, Pogue J et al. Waist circumference and waist‐to‐hip ratio as predictors of cardiovascular events: meta‐regression analysis of prospective studies. European Heart Journal, 2007, 287:850‐856. Delavari A, Forouzanfar MH, Alikhani S et al. First nationwide study of the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome and optimal cutoff points of waist circumference in the Middle East: the national survey of risk factors for noncommunicable diseases of Iran. Diabetes Care, 2009, 326:1092‐1097. Derby CA, Zilber S, Brambilla D et al. Body mass index, waist circumference and waist to hip ratio and change in sex steroid hormones: the Massachusetts Male Ageing Study. Clinical Endocrinology, 2006, 651:125‐131. Deurenberg‐Yap M, Chew SK, Lin VF et al. Relationships between indices of obesity and its co‐ morbidities in multi‐ethnic Singapore. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2001, 2510:1554‐1562. Deurenberg‐Yap M, Schmidt G, van Staveren WA et al. The paradox of low body mass index and high body fat percentage among Chinese, Malays and Indians in Singapore. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2000, 248:1011‐1017. Diaz VA, Mainous AG, 3rd, Baker R et al. How does ethnicity affect the association between obesity and diabetes? Diabetic Medicine, 2007, 2411:1199‐1204. Dolan CM, Kraemer H, Browner W et al. Associations between body composition, anthropometry, and mortality in women aged 65 years and older. American Journal of Public Health, 2007, 975:913‐918. Esteghamati A, Khalilzadeh O, Rashidi A et al. Association between physical activity and insulin resistance in Iranian adults: National Surveillance of Risk Factors of Non‐Communicable Diseases SuRFNCD‐2007. Preventive Medicine, 2009, 495:402‐406. Forbes GB. Longitudinal changes in adult fat‐free mass: influence of body weight. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 1999, 706:1025‐1031. Ford ES, Mokdad AH, Giles WH. Trends in waist circumference among U.S. adults. Obesity Research, 2003, 1110:1223‐1231. Gautier JF, Milner MR, Elam E et al. Visceral adipose tissue is not increased in Pima Indians compared with equally obese Caucasians and is not related to insulin action or secretion. Diabetologia, 1999, 421:28‐34. Gelber RP, Gaziano JM, Orav EJ et al. Measures of obesity and cardiovascular risk among men and women. Journal of the American College of Cardiolog, 2008, 528:605‐615. Gibson R. Principles of nutritional assessment. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1990. Gunderson EP, Murtaugh MA, Lewis CE et al. Excess gains in weight and waist circumference associated with childbearing: The Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults Study CARDIA. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2004, 284:525‐535. Haffner SM, D'Agostino R, Saad MF et al. Increased insulin resistance and insulin secretion in nondiabetic African‐Americans and Hispanics compared with non‐Hispanic whites. The Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study. Diabetes, 1996, 456:742‐748. Han TS, van Leer EM, Seidell JC et al. Waist circumference action levels in the identification of cardiovascular risk factors: prevalence study in a random sample. BMJ, 1995, 3117017:1401‐1405. Hartz AJ, Rupley DC, Jr., Kalkhoff RD et al. Relationship of obesity to diabetes: influence of obesity level and body fat distribution. Preventive Medicine, 1983, 122:351‐357. Harvie M, Hooper L, Howell AH. Central obesity and breast cancer risk: a systematic review. Obesity Reviews, 2003, 43:157‐173. Huxley R, Barzi F, Lee CM et al. Waist circumference thresholds provide an accurate and widely applicable method for the discrimination of diabetes. Diabetes Care, 2007, 3012:3116‐ 3118. Huxley R, James WP, Barzi F et al. Ethnic comparisons of the cross‐sectional relationships between measures of body size with diabetes and hypertension. Obesity Reviews, 2008, 9 Suppl 1:53‐ 61. Huxley R, Mendis S, Zheleznyakov E et al. Body mass index, waist circumference and waist:hip ratio as predictors of cardiovascular risk – a review of the literature. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2010, 641:16‐22. IDF. The IDF consensus worldwide definition of the metabolic syndrome. International Diabetes Federation IDF, 2006. Ito H, Nakasuga K, Ohshima A et al. Detection of cardiovascular risk factors by indices of obesity obtained from anthropometry and dual‐energy X‐ray absorptiometry in Japanese individuals. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2003, 272:232‐237. James W, Jackson‐Leach R, Mhurchu C et al. Overweight and obesity high body mass index. In: Ezzati, J, Lopez, A et al., eds. Comparative quantification of health risks: Global and regional burden of disease attributable to selected major risk factors. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004:497‐596. JSSO. New criteria for 'obesity disease' in Japan. Japanese Circulation Journal, 2002, 6611:987‐992. Kagawa M, Binns CB, Hills AP. Body composition and anthropometry in Japanese and Australian Caucasian males and Japanese females. Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2007, 16 Suppl 1:31‐36. Kalmijn S, Curb JD, Rodriguez BL et al. The association of body weight and anthropometry with mortality in elderly men: the Honolulu Heart Program. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 1999, 234:395‐402. Katzmarzyk PT, Craig CL, Bouchard C. Adiposity, adipose tissue distribution and mortality rates in the Canada Fitness Survey follow‐up study. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2002, 268:1054‐1059. Koch E, Bogado M, Araya F et al. Impact of parity on anthropometric measures of obesity controlling by multiple confounders: a cross‐sectional study in Chilean women. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 2008, 625:461‐470. Koster A, Leitzmann MF, Schatzkin A et al. Waist circumference and mortality. American Journal of Epidemiology, 2008, 16712:1465‐1475. Lahti‐Koski M, Harald K, Mannisto S et al. Fifteen‐year changes in body mass index and waist circumference in Finnish adults. European Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation, 2007, 143:398‐404. Lapidus L, Bengtsson C, Larsson B et al. Distribution of adipose tissue and risk of cardiovascular disease and death: a 12 year follow up of participants in the population study of women in Gothenburg, Sweden. British Medical Journal, 1984, 2896454:1257‐1261. Larsson B, Svardsudd K, Welin L et al. Abdominal adipose tissue distribution, obesity, and risk of cardiovascular disease and death: 13 year follow up of participants in the study of men born in 1913. British Medical Journal, 1984, 2886428:1401‐1404. Lassek WD, Gaulin SJ. Changes in body fat distribution in relation to parity in American women: a covert form of maternal depletion. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 2006, 1312:295‐302. Lear SA, Humphries KH, Frohlich JJ et al. Appropriateness of current thresholds for obesity‐related measures among Aboriginal people. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 2007a, 17712:1499‐1505. Lear SA, Humphries KH, Kohli S et al. Visceral adipose tissue accumulation differs according to ethnic background: results of the Multicultural Community Health Assessment Trial M‐ CHAT. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2007b, 862:353‐359. Lear SA, James PT, Ko GT et al. Appropriateness of waist circumference and waist‐to‐hip ratio cutoffs for different ethnic groups. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2010, 641:42‐61. Lee CM, Huxley RR, Wildman RP et al. Indices of abdominal obesity are better discriminators of cardiovascular risk factors than BMI: a meta‐analysis. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 2008, 617:646‐653. Lohman T, Roche A, Martorell R. Anthropometric standardization reference manual. Champagne, Illinois, Human Kinetic Books, 1988. Macdonald HM, New SA, Campbell MK et al. Longitudinal changes in weight in perimenopausal and early postmenopausal women: effects of dietary energy intake, energy expenditure, dietary calcium intake and hormone replacement therapy. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2003, 276:669‐676. Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Hennekens CH et al. Body weight and longevity. A reassessment. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1987, 2573:353‐358. Mirmiran P, Esmaillzadeh A, Azizi F. Detection of cardiovascular risk factors by anthropometric measures in Tehranian adults: receiver operating characteristic ROC curve analysis. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2004, 588:1110‐1118. Moghaddam AA, Woodward M, Huxley R. Obesity and risk of colorectal cancer: a meta‐analysis of 1612:2533‐2547. Nelson TL, Bessesen DH, Marshall JA. Relationship of abdominal obesity measured by DXA and waist circumference with insulin sensitivity in Hispanic and non‐Hispanic white individuals: the San Luis Valley Diabetes Study. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and Reviews, 2008, 241:33‐ 40. NHLBI Obesity Education Initiative. The practical guide: Identification, evaluation and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults. National Institutes of Health NIH Publication Number 00‐ 4084, 2000. Nishida C, Ko GT, Kumanyika S. Body fat distribution and noncommunicable diseases in populations: overview of the 2008 WHO Expert Consultation on Waist Circumference and Waist‐Hip Ratio. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2010, 641:2‐5. Nyamdorj R, Qiao Q, Lam TH et al. BMI compared with central obesity indicators in relation to diabetes and hypertension in Asians. Obesity Silver Spring, 2008, 167:1622‐1635. Obesity in Asia Collaboration. Is central obesity a better discriminator of the risk of hypertension than body mass index in ethnically diverse populations? Journal of Hypertension, 2008, 262:169‐177. Ohlson LO, Larsson B, Svardsudd K et al. The influence of body fat distribution on the incidence of diabetes mellitus. 13.5 years of follow‐up of the participants in the study of men born in 1913. Diabetes, 1985, 3410:1055‐1058. Okosun IS, Cooper RS, Rotimi CN et al. Association of waist circumference with risk of hypertension and type 2 diabetes in Nigerians, Jamaicans, and African‐Americans. Diabetes Care, 1998, 2111:1836‐1842. Okosun IS, Liao Y, Rotimi CN et al. Predictive values of waist circumference for dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes and hypertension in overweight White, Black, and Hispanic American adults. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 2000a, 534:401‐408. Okosun IS, Rotimi CN, Forrester TE et al. Predictive value of abdominal obesity cut‐off points for hypertension in blacks from west African and Caribbean island nations. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2000b, 242:180‐186. Piers LS, Rowley KG, Soares MJ et al. Relation of adiposity and body fat distribution to body mass index in Australians of Aboriginal and European ancestry. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2003, 578:956‐963. Pischon T, Boeing H, Hoffmann K et al. General and abdominal adiposity and risk of death in Europe. New England Journal of Medicine, 2008, 35920:2105‐2120. Price GM, Uauy R, Breeze E et al. Weight, shape, and mortality risk in older persons: elevated waist‐ hip ratio, not high body mass index, is associated with a greater risk of death. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2006, 842:449‐460. Punyadeera C, van der Merwe MT, Crowther NJ et al. Weight‐related differences in glucose metabolism and free fatty acid production in two South African population groups. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2001a, 258:1196‐1205. Punyadeera C, van der Merwe MT, Crowther NJ et al. Ethnic differences in lipid metabolism in two groups of obese South African women. Journal of Lipid Research, 2001b, 425:760‐767. Qiao Q, Nyamdorj R. Is the association of type II diabetes with waist circumference or waist‐to‐hip ratio stronger than that with body mass index? European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2010a, 641:30‐34. Qiao Q, Nyamdorj R. The optimal cutoff values and their performance of waist circumference and waist‐to‐hip ratio for diagnosing type II diabetes. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2010b, 641:23‐29. Ross R, Berentzen T, Bradshaw AJ et al. Does the relationship between waist circumference, morbidity and mortality depend on measurement protocol for waist circumference? Obesity Reviews, 2008, 94:312‐325. Rush E, Plank L, Chandu V et al. Body size, body composition, and fat distribution: a comparison of young New Zealand men of European, Pacific Island, and Asian Indian ethnicities. New Zealand Medical Journal, 2004, 1171207:U1203. Rush EC, Freitas I, Plank LD. Body size, body composition and fat distribution: comparative analysis of European, Maori, Pacific Island and Asian Indian adults. British Journal of Nutrition, 2009, 1024:632‐641. Rush EC, Goedecke JH, Jennings C et al. BMI, fat and muscle differences in urban women of five ethnicities from two countries. International Journal of Obesity, 2007, 318:1232‐1239. Sanchez‐Castillo CP, Velazquez‐Monroy O, Berber A et al. Anthropometric cutoff points for predicting chronic diseases in the Mexican National Health Survey 2000. Obesity Research, 2003, 113:442‐451. Seidell JC. Waist circumference and waist/hip ratio in relation to all‐cause mortality, cancer and sleep apnea. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2010, 641:35‐41. Seidell JC, Verschuren WM, van Leer EM et al. Overweight, underweight, and mortality. A prospective study of 48,287 men and women. Archives of Internal Medicine, 1996, 1569:958‐963. Shaten BJ, Smith GD, Kuller LH et al. Risk factors for the development of type II diabetes among men enrolled in the usual care group of the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial. Diabetes Care, 1993, 1610:1331‐1339. Shimokata H, Tobin JD, Muller DC et al. Studies in the distribution of body fat: I. Effects of age, sex, and obesity. Journal of Gerontology, 1989, 442:M66‐73. Skarfors ET, Selinus KI, Lithell HO. Risk factors for developing non‐insulin dependent diabetes: a 10 year follow up of men in Uppsala. BMJ, 1991, 3036805:755‐760. Sternfeld B, Wang H, Quesenberry CP, Jr. et al. Physical activity and changes in weight and waist circumference in midlife women: findings from the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation. American Journal of Epidemiology, 2004, 1609:912‐922. Stevens J, Katz EG, Huxley RR. Associations between gender, age and waist circumference. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2010, 641:6‐15. Toth MJ, Tchernof A, Sites CK et al. Effect of menopausal status on body composition and abdominal fat distribution. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2000, 242:226‐231. van der Merwe MT, Crowther NJ, Schlaphoff GP et al. Evidence for insulin resistance in black women from South Africa. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 2000, 2410:1340‐1346. Vazquez G, Duval S, Jacobs DR, Jr. et al. Comparison of body mass index, waist circumference, and waist/hip ratio in predicting incident diabetes: a meta‐analysis. Epidemiologic Reviews, 2007, 29:115‐128. Welborn TA, Dhaliwal SS. Preferred clinical measures of central obesity for predicting mortality. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2007, 6112:1373‐1379. Welch GW, Sowers MR. The interrelationship between body topology and body composition varies with age among women. Journal of Nutrition, 2000, 1309:2371‐2377. Wells JC. Sexual dimorphism of body composition. Best Practice & Research Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 2007, 213:415‐430. Westat Inc. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey NHANES III. National Center for Health Statistics NCHS, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC, 1998. WHO. Physical status: the use and interpretation of anthropometry. Report of a WHO expert consultation. Geneva, World Health Organization WHO, 1995. WHO. Definition, diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus and its complications: Report of a WHO consultation. Geneva, World Health Organization WHO, 1999. WHO. Obesity: Preventing and managing the global epidemic. Report of a WHO Consultation TRS 894. Geneva, World Health Organization WHO, 2000a. WHO. Global strategy for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases. Geneva, World Health Organization WHO, 2000b. WHO. Screening for type 2 diabetes: Report of a WHO and IDF meeting. Geneva, World Health Organization WHO, 2003. WHO. Appropriate body‐mass index for Asian populations and its implications for policy and intervention strategies. Lancet, 2004, 3639403:157‐163. WHO. Action plan for the global strategy for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases, 2008–2013. Geneva, World Health Organization WHO, 2008a. WHO. WHO STEPwise approach to surveillance STEPS. Geneva, World Health Organization WHO, 2008b. WHO/FAO. Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation. Geneva, World Health Organization/Food and Agriculture Organization WHO/FAO, 2003. Wildman RP, Gu D, Reynolds K et al. Appropriate body mass index and waist circumference cutoffs for categorization of overweight and central adiposity among Chinese adults. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2004, 805:1129‐1136. Wing RR, Matthews KA, Kuller LH et al. Weight gain at the time of menopause. Archives of Internal Medicine, 1991, 1511:97‐102. Wolf AM, Colditz GA. Current estimates of the economic cost of obesity in the United States. Obesity Research, 1998, 62:97‐106. Wu CH, Heshka S, Wang J et al. Truncal fat in relation to total body fat: influences of age, sex, ethnicity and fatness. International Journal of Obesity, 2007, 319:1384‐1391. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S et al. Obesity and the risk of myocardial infarction in 27,000 participants from 52 countries: a case‐control study. Lancet, 2005, 3669497:1640‐1649. Zhang C, Rexrode KM, van Dam RM et al. Abdominal obesity and the risk of all‐cause, cardiovascular, and cancer mortality: sixteen years of follow‐up in US women. Circulation, 2008, 11713:1658‐1667. Zhu S, Heymsfield SB, Toyoshima H et al. Race‐ethnicity‐specific waist circumference cutoffs for identifying cardiovascular disease risk factors. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2005, 812:409‐415. Zimmet PZ, Alberti KG. Introduction: Globalization and the non‐communicable disease epidemic. Obesity Silver Spring, 2006, 141:1‐3. For further information please contact: Department of Nutrition for Health and Development World Health Organization Switzerland Fax: +41 22 791 4156 E-mail: Web site: www.who.int/nutrition ISBN 978 92 4 150149 1