Iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings The IASC Guidelines for Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings reflect the insights of numerous agencies and practitioners worldwide and provide valuable information to organisations and individuals on how to respond appropriately during humanitarian emergencies. specific action sheets offer useful guidance on mental health and psychosocial support, and cover the following areas: coordination assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation Protection and Human Rights standards Human Resources community Mobilisation and support Health services Education Dissemination of Information Food security and Nutrition shelter and site Planning Water and sanitation The Guidelines include a matrix, with guidance for emergency planning, actions to be taken in the early stages of an emergency and comprehensive responses needed in the recovery and rehabilitation phases. The matrix is a valuable tool for use in coordination, collaboration and advocacy efforts. It provides a framework for mapping the extent to which essential first responses are being implemented during an emergency. The Guidelines include a companion cD-ROM, which contains the full Guidelines and also resource documents in electronic format. Published by the Inter-agency standing committee Iasc, the Guidelines give humanitarian actors useful inter-agency, inter-sectoral guidance and tools for responding effectively in the midst of emergencies. I a s c G u i d e l i n e s o n M e n t a l H e a l t h a n d P s y c h o s o c i a l s u p p o r t i n E m e r g e n c y s e t t i n g s ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. i Proofread by: Approved by: Iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. ii Proofread by: Approved by: Foreword © Inter-Agency Standing Committee 2007 The Inter-Agency Standing Committee IASC was established in 1992 in response to General The Inter-agency standing committee Iasc issues these Guidelines to enable humanitarian actors to plan, establish and coordinate a set of minimum multi-sectoral Assembly Resolution 46/182, which called for strengthened coordination of humanitarian assistance. responses to protect and improve people’s mental health and psychosocial well-being The resolution set up the IASC as the primary mechanism for facilitating inter-agency decision-making in response to complex emergencies and natural disasters. The IASC is formed by the heads of a broad range of UN and non-UN humanitarian organisations. For further information on the IASC, please access its website at: This IASC publication will be available in different languages and can be obtained from the IASC website at: Cover page photos: © International Rescue Committee Suggested citation: Inter-Agency Standing Committee IASC 2007. IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings. Geneva: IASC. For feedback or suggestions for the improvement of this publication, please e-mail: or . in the midst of an emergency. Populations affected by emergencies frequently experience enormous suffering. Humanitarian actors are increasingly active to protect and improve people’s mental health and psychosocial well-being during and after emergencies. a significant gap, however, has been the absence of a multi-sectoral, inter-agency framework that enables effective coordination, identifies useful practices, flags potentially harmful practices and clarifies how different approaches to mental health and psychosocial support complement one another. The Guidelines offer essential advice on how to facilitate an integrated approach to address the most urgent mental health and psychosocial issues in emergency situations. I would like to thank the members of the Iasc Task Force on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings and specifically the Task Force co-chairs, WHO and Interaction, for achieving inter-agency consensus on minimum responses in this important area of humanitarian aid. I call upon all those who are involved in humanitarian assistance to implement these Guidelines. Kasidis Rochanakorn chair, Inter-agency standing committee Working Group Director, OcHa Geneva ii iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings acknowledgements iii ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. iv Proofread by: Approved by: Acknowledgements The Inter-agency standing committee • Médicos del Mundo MdM-spain The Task Force is grateful for comments Goa; south african Institute for Task Force on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings wishes to thank everybody who has collaborated on the development of these guidelines. special thanks to • Médecins sans Frontières Holland MsF-Holland • Oxfam GB • Refugees Education Trust RET the following agencies who are members • save the children UK sc-UK of the Task Force and whose staff have International Federation of Red cross developed these guidelines: and Red crescent societies IFRc action contre la Faim acF Interaction co-chair, through: • american Red cross aRc International Organization for Migration IOM Office for the coordination of Humanitarian affairs OcHa • christian children’s Fund ccF United Nations children’s Fund • International catholic Migration UNIcEF commission IcMc United Nations High commissioner • International Medical corps IMc • International Rescue committee for Refugees UNHcR United Nations Population Fund UNFPa on earlier versions of the matrix and/or Traumatic stress; sTEPs consulting selected action sheets by individual social; Tanganyika christian Refugee reviewers affiliated with the following service; Terre des Hommes organisations: NGOs: aga Khan Development Network; antares Foundation; Foundation; The Foundation for children and War; Turkish Red crescent society; War child Holland. austrian Red cross; BasicNeeds; Universities: Birzeit University West caRE Usa; child Fund afghanistan; Bank; Boston University; columbia church of sweden aid; church University; Harvard University; World service; community and Johns Hopkins University; Karolinska Family services International; Enfants Institutet; Kent state University; King’s Réfugiés du Monde; Fundación college; London school of Hygiene Dos Mundos; Global Psycho-social and Tropical Medicine; Northumbria Initiatives; Handicap International; University; Pomona college; san Jose Headington Institute; Human Rights state University; state University of Watch; Impact Foundation; New York; Uniformed services International critical Incident stress University of the Health sciences; World Food Programme WFP Foundation; International University of colombo; University IRc • Mercy corps • save the children Usa sc-Usa Inter-agency Network for Education World Health Organization WHO co-chair in Emergencies INEE The WHO Department of Mental Health International council of Voluntary agencies IcVa, through: • actionaid International • caRE austria • HealthNet-TPO and substance abuse through funds from the Government of Italy and the christian children’s Fund are gratefully acknowledged for making available substantial staff member time towards facilitating the project. Rehabilitation council for Torture of Geneva; University of Jaffna; Victims; Jesuit Refugee service; University of Lund; University of Médecins sans Frontières switzerland; Maryland; University of Melbourne; Médecins sans Frontières spain; University of New south Wales; Norwegian Refugee council; University of Oxford; University Palestinian Red crescent society; of Pennsylvania; University of south People in aid; Programa Psicosocial Dakota; University of Western sydney; en chiapas; Psychologues du Monde; University of the Philippines; PULIH Foundation Indonesia; Victoria University; Vrije Universiteit Refugees International; sangath centre amsterdam; Wageningen University. iv iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings acknowledgements v ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. vi Proofread by: Approved by: Table of contents Others e.g. professional associations, intervention: international Journal Foreword government agencies, consortia, of Mental Health, Psychosocial Work Acknowledgements networks: american Psychiatric and counselling in areas association; american Psychological of armed conflict; Mangrove association; asian Harm Reduction Psychosocial support and Network; canadian Forces Mental coordination Unit; Ministry of Health, Health services; cellule d’Urgence Iran; Ministry of Health, sri Lanka; Médico-Psychologique – saMU de Psychologists for social Responsibility; Chapter 1. Introduction Background Mental health and psychosocial impact of emergencies The guidelines How to use this document Paris; centre Hospitalier saint-anne; Psychosocial Working Group; Regional core principles centers for Disease control and Psychosocial support Initiative for Prevention cDc; consortium of children affected by aIDs, Poverty Humanitarian agencies sri Lanka; and conflict REPssI; United Nations consultative Group on Early Educational, scientific and cultural Frequently asked questions Chapter 2. Matrix of Interventions Chapter 3. Action Sheets for Minimum Response childhood care and Development; Organization UNEscO; United CooRdInAtIon Department of Human services, states agency for International Melbourne; European Federation of Development; World association Psychologists’ associations; Food and for Psychosocial Rehabilitation; agriculture Organization of the United World Federation for Mental Health; Nations FaO; Hellenic centre of World Federation of Occupational Mental Health; Iasc Early Recovery Therapists; World Psychiatric 1.1: Establish coordination of intersectoral mental health and psychosocial support ASSeSSMent, MonItoRInG And evAluAtIon 2.1: conduct assessments of mental health and psychosocial issues 2.2: Initiate participatory systems for monitoring and evaluation cluster; Iasc Health cluster; Iasc association. PRoteCtIon And huMAn RIGhtS StAndARdS camp coordination and camp Management cluster; Iberoamerican Eco-Bioethics Network for Education, science and Technology; International alliance for child and adolescent Mental Health and schools; International association for child and adolescent Psychiatry and allied Professions; International society for Traumatic stress studies; The Task Force thanks International Rescue committee for organising the design and printing and UNIcEF and UNHcR for funding the printing of these guidelines. 3.1: apply a human rights framework through mental health and psychosocial support 3.2: Identify, monitor, prevent and respond to protection threats and failures through social protection 3.3: Identify, monitor, prevent and respond to protection threats and abuses through legal protection huMAn ReSouRCeS 4.1: Identify and recruit staff and engage volunteers who understand local culture iii iv vi iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Table of contents vii ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. viii Proofread by: Approved by: 4.2: Enforce staff codes of conduct and ethical guidelines 4.3: Organise orientation and training of aid workers in mental health and psychosocial support 4.4: Prevent and manage problems in mental health and psychosocial well-being among staff and volunteers CoMMunIty MobIlISAtIon And SuPPoRt 5.1: Facilitate conditions for community mobilisation, ownership and control of emergency response in all sectors 5.2: Facilitate community self-help and social support 5.3: Facilitate conditions for appropriate communal cultural, spiritual and religious healing practices 5.4: Facilitate support for young children 0–8 years and their care-givers heAlth SeRvICeS 6.1: Include specific psychological and social considerations in provision of general health care 6.2: Provide access to care for people with severe mental disorders 6.3: Protect and care for people with severe mental disorders and other mental and neurological disabilities living in institutions 6.4: Learn about and, where appropriate, collaborate with local, indigenous and traditional health systems 6.5: Minimise harm related to alcohol and other substance use eduCAtIon 7.1: strengthen access to safe and supportive education dISSeMInAtIon oF InFoRMAtIon 8.1: Provide information to the affected population on the emergency, relief efforts and their legal rights 8.2: Provide access to information about positive coping methods Food SeCuRIty And nutRItIon 9.1: Include specific social and psychological considerations safe aid for all in dignity, considering cultural practices and household roles in the provision of food and nutritional support ShelteR And SIte PlAnnInG 10.1: Include specific social considerations safe, dignified, culturally and socially appropriate assistance in site planning and shelter provision, in a coordinated manner WAteR And SAnItAtIon 11.1: Include specific social considerations safe and culturally appropriate access for all in dignity in the provision of water and sanitation viii iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Table of contents ix ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. x Proofread by: Approved by: c H a P T E R 1 Introduction Background armed conflicts and natural disasters cause significant psychological and social suffering to affected populations. The psychological and social impacts of emergencies may be acute in the short term, but they can also undermine the long-term mental health and psychosocial well-being of the affected population. These impacts may threaten peace, human rights and development. One of the priorities in emergencies is thus to protect and improve people’s mental health and psychosocial well-being. achieving this priority requires coordinated action among all government and non- government humanitarian actors. a significant gap, however, has been the absence of a multi-sectoral, inter- agency framework that enables effective coordination, identifies useful practices and flags potentially harmful practices, and clarifies how different approaches to mental health and psychosocial support complement one another. This document aims to fill that gap. These guidelines reflect the insights of practitioners from different geographic regions, disciplines and sectors, and reflect an emerging consensus on good practice among practitioners. The core idea behind them is that, in the early phase of an emergency, social supports are essential to protect and support mental health and psychosocial well-being. In addition, the guidelines recommend selected psychological and psychiatric interventions for specific problems. The composite term mental health and psychosocial support is used in this document to describe any type of local or outside support that aims to protect or promote psychosocial well-being and/or prevent or treat mental disorder. although the terms mental health and psychosocial support are closely related and overlap, for many aid workers they reflect different, yet complementary, approaches. aid agencies outside the health sector tend to speak of supporting psychosocial well-being. Health sector agencies tend to speak of mental health, yet historically have also used the terms psychosocial rehabilitation and psychosocial treatment to describe non-biological interventions for people with mental disorders. Exact definitions of these terms vary between and within aid organisations, disciplines and countries. as the current document covers intersectoral, inter-agency guidelines, the composite term mental health and psychosocial support MHPss serves to unite as Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 2 Proofread by: Approved by: broad a group of actors as possible and underscores the need for diverse, • Humanitarian aid-related problems e.g. anxiety due to a lack of information complementary approaches in providing appropriate supports. about food distribution. scientific evidence regarding the mental health and psychosocial supports that prove most effective in emergency settings is still thin. Most research in this area has been conducted months or years after the end of the acute emergency phase. as this emerging field develops, the research base will grow, as will the base of practitioners’ field experience. To incorporate emerging insights, this publication should be updated periodically. Mental health and psychosocial impact of emergencies Problems Emergencies create a wide range of problems experienced at the individual, family, community and societal levels. at every level, emergencies erode normally protective supports, increase the risks of diverse problems and tend to amplify pre-existing problems of social injustice and inequality. For example, natural disasters such as floods typically have a disproportionate impact on poor people, who may be living in relatively dangerous places. Mental health and psychosocial problems in emergencies are highly inter- connected, yet may be predominantly social or psychological in nature. significant problems of a predominantly social nature include: • Pre-existing pre-emergency social problems e.g. extreme poverty; belonging to a group that is discriminated against or marginalised; political oppression; • Emergency-induced social problems e.g. family separation; disruption of social networks; destruction of community structures, resources and trust; increased gender-based violence; and • Humanitarian aid-induced social problems e.g. undermining of community structures or traditional support mechanisms. similarly, problems of a predominantly psychological nature include: • Pre-existing problems e.g. severe mental disorder; alcohol abuse; • Emergency-induced problems e.g. grief, non-pathological distress; depression and anxiety disorders, including post-traumatic stress disorder PTsD; and Thus, mental health and psychosocial problems in emergencies encompass far more than the experience of PTsD. People at increased risk of problems In emergencies, not everyone has or develops significant psychological problems. Many people show resilience, that is the ability to cope relatively well in situations of adversity. There are numerous interacting social, psychological and biological factors that influence whether people develop psychological problems or exhibit resilience in the face of adversity. Depending on the emergency context, particular groups of people are at increased risk of experiencing social and/or psychological problems. although many key forms of support should be available to the emergency-affected population in general, good programming specifically includes the provision of relevant supports to the people at greatest risk, who need to be identified for each specific crisis see chapter 3, action sheet 2.1. all sub-groups of a population can potentially be at risk, depending on the nature of the crisis. The following are groups of people who frequently have been shown to be at increased risk of various problems in diverse emergencies: • Women e.g. pregnant women, mothers, single mothers, widows and, in some cultures, unmarried adult women and teenage girls; • Men e.g. ex-combatants, idle men who have lost the means to take care of their families, young men at risk of detention, abduction or being targets of violence; • children from newborn infants to young people 18 years of age, such as separated or unaccompanied children including orphans, children recruited or used by armed forces or groups, trafficked children, children in conflict with the law, children engaged in dangerous labour, children who live or work on the streets and undernourished/understimulated children; • Elderly people especially when they have lost family members who were care-givers; • Extremely poor people; • Refugees, internally displaced persons IDPs and migrants in irregular situations  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 4 Proofread by: Approved by: especially trafficked women and children without identification papers; common error in work on mental health and psychosocial well-being is to ignore these • People who have been exposed to extremely stressful events/trauma e.g. people who have lost close family members or their entire livelihoods, rape and torture survivors, witnesses of atrocities, etc.; • People in the community with pre-existing, severe physical, neurological or mental disabilities or disorders; • People in institutions orphans, elderly people, people with neurological/mental disabilities or disorders; • People experiencing severe social stigma e.g. untouchables/dalit, commercial sex workers, people with severe mental disorders, survivors of sexual violence; resources and to focus solely on deficits – the weaknesses, suffering and pathology – of the affected group. affected individuals have resources such as skills in problem-solving, communication, negotiation and earning a living. Examples of potentially supportive social resources include families, local government officers, community leaders, traditional healers in many societies, community health workers, teachers, women’s groups, youth clubs and community planning groups, among many others. affected communities may have economic resources such as savings, land, crops and animals; educational resources such as schools and teachers; and health resources such as health posts and staff. significant religious and spiritual resources include religious • People at specific risk of human rights violations e.g. political activists, ethnic leaders, local healers, practices of prayer and worship, and cultural practices such or linguistic minorities, people in institutions or detention, people already as burial rites. exposed to human rights violations. It is important to recognise that: • There is large diversity of risks, problems and resources within and across each of the groups mentioned above. • some individuals within an at-risk group may fare relatively well. To plan an appropriate emergency response, it is important to know the nature of local resources, whether they are helpful or harmful, and the extent to which affected people can access them. Indeed, some local practices – ranging from particular traditional cultural practices to care in many existing custodial institutions – may be harmful and may violate human rights principles see action sheets 5.3, 6.3 and 6.4. • some groups e.g. combatants may be simultaneously at increased risk of some problems e.g. substance abuse and at reduced risk of other problems The guidelines e.g. starvation. • some groups may be at risk in one emergency, while being relatively privileged Purpose of these guidelines in another emergency. • Where one group is at risk, other groups are often at risk as well sphere Project, 2004. To identify people as ‘at risk’ is not to suggest that they are passive victims. although at-risk people need support, they often have capacities and social networks that enable them to contribute to their families and to be active in social, religious and political life. The primary purpose of these guidelines is to enable humanitarian actors and communities to plan, establish and coordinate a set of minimum multi-sectoral responses to protect and improve people’s mental health and psychosocial well-being in the midst of an emergency. The focus of the guidelines is on implementing minimum responses, which are essential, high-priority responses that should be implemented as soon as possible in an emergency. Minimum responses are the first things that ought to be done; they are the essential first steps that lay the foundation for the more comprehensive efforts that may be needed including during the stabilised phase and Resources early reconstruction. affected groups have assets or resources that support mental health and psychosocial To complement the focus on minimum response, the guidelines also list well-being. The nature and extent of the resources available and accessible may vary concrete strategies for mental health and psychosocial support to be considered mainly with age, gender, the socio-cultural context and the emergency environment. a before and after the acute emergency phase. These ‘before’ emergency preparedness  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 6 Proofread by: Approved by: and ‘after’ comprehensive response steps establish a context for the minimum An overview of the guidelines response and emphasise that the minimum response is only the starting point for more The structure of these Iasc Guidelines is consistent with two previous Iasc comprehensive supports see chapter 2. documents: the Guidelines for HiV/aiDs interventions in Emergency settings although the guidelines have been written for low- and middle-income and the Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence interventions in countries where Inter-agency standing committee Iasc member agencies tend to Humanitarian settings . all three of these Iasc documents include work, the overall framework and many parts of the guidelines apply also to large- a matrix, which details actions for various actors during different stages of scale emergencies in high-income countries. target audience These guidelines were designed for use by all humanitarian actors, including community-based organisations, government authorities, United Nations organisations, non-government organisations NGOs and donors operating in emergency settings at local, national and international levels. emergencies, and a set of action sheets that explain how to implement minimum response items identified in the middle column Minimum Response of the matrix. The current guidelines contain 25 such action sheets see chapter 3. The matrix displayed in chapter 2 provides an overview of recommended key interventions and supports for protecting and improving mental health and psychosocial well-being. The three matrix columns outline the: • Emergency preparedness steps to be taken before emergencies occur; The orientation of these guidelines is not towards individual agencies or • Minimum responses to be implemented during the acute phase of the emergency; projects. Implementation of the guidelines requires extensive collaboration among and various humanitarian actors: no single community or agency is expected to have the capacity to implement all necessary minimum responses in the midst of an emergency. The guidelines should be accessible to all humanitarian actors to organise collaboratively the necessary supports. Of particular importance is the active involvement at every stage of communities and local authorities, whose participation is essential for successful, coordinated action, the enhancement of local capacities and sustainability. To maximise the engagement of local actors, the guidelines should be translated into the relevant local languages. These guidelines are not intended solely for mental health and psychosocial workers. Numerous action sheets in the guidelines outline social supports relevant to the core humanitarian domains, such as disaster management, human rights, protection, general health, education, water and sanitation, food security and nutrition, shelter, camp management, community development and mass communication. Mental health professionals seldom work in these domains, but are encouraged to use this document to advocate with communities and colleagues from other disciplines to ensure that appropriate action is taken to address the social risk factors that affect mental health and psychosocial well-being. However, the clinical and specialised forms of psychological or psychiatric supports indicated in the guidelines should only be implemented under the leadership of mental health professionals. • comprehensive responses to be implemented once the minimum responses have been implemented. Typically, this is during the stabilised and early reconstruction phases of the emergency. The action sheets emphasise the importance of multi-sectoral, coordinated action. Each action sheet therefore includes hyper-links, indicated by turquoise text, relating to action sheets in other domains/sectors. Each action sheet consists of a rationale/background; descriptions of key actions; selected sample process indicators; an example of good practice in previous emergencies; and a list of resource materials for further information. almost all listed resource materials are available via the internet and are also included in the accompanying cD-ROM. How to use this document Reading the document from cover to cover may not be possible during an emergency. It may be read selectively, focusing on items that have the greatest relevance to the reader’s responsibilities or capacities. A good way to begin is to read the matrix,  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 8 Proofread by: Approved by: focusing on the centre column of minimum response, look for the items of greatest non-participatory sectoral programmes are being established, the guidelines could relevance and go directly to the corresponding action sheets. It is important to be used to make the case with different stakeholders for why a more participatory remember that no single agency is expected to implement every item in the guidelines. approach would be beneficial. similarly, if very young children are at risk and The guidelines aim to strengthen the humanitarian response in emergencies by receiving no support, action sheet 5.4 could be used to advocate for the establishment all actors, from pre-emergency preparedness through all steps of response programme of appropriate early child development supports. planning, implementation and evaluation. They are especially useful as a tool for strengthening coordination and advocacy. Coordination In emergencies, coordination of aid is one of the most important and most challenging tasks. This document provides detailed guidance on coordination see action sheet 1.1 and is a useful coordination tool in two other respects. First, it calls for a single, overarching coordination group on mental health and psychosocial support to be set up when an emergency response is first mobilised. The rationale for this is that mental health supports and psychosocial supports inside and outside the health sector are mutually enhancing and complementary even though in the past they have often been organised separately by actors in the health and protection sectors respectively. Because each is vital for the other, it is essential to coordinate the two. If no coordination group exists or if there are separate mental health coordination and psychosocial coordination groups, the guidelines can be used to advocate for the establishment of one overarching group to coordinate MHPss responses. second, the guidelines – and in particular the matrix – provide reference points that can be used to judge the extent to which minimum responses are being implemented in a given community. any items listed in the matrix that are not being implemented may constitute gaps that need to be addressed. In this respect, the matrix offers the coordination group a useful guide. Advocacy for improved supports Working with partners to develop appropriate mental health and psychosocial supports is an important part of advocacy. Dialogue with partners, whether NGO, government or UN staff, may help steer them, where needed, toward the kinds of practices outlined in this document. The guidelines may also be used for advocacy in other ways. For example, the inclusion of a comprehensive response column in the matrix facilitates advocacy for long-term planning e.g. for the development of mental health services within the health system of the country concerned. However, these guidelines should not be used as a cookbook. although the matrix suggests actions that should be the minimum response in many emergencies, a local situation analysis should be conducted, to identify more precisely the greatest needs, specify priority actions and guide a socially and culturally appropriate response. The guidelines do not give details for implementation, but rather contain a list of key actions with brief explanations and references to further resource materials regarding implementation. Core principles 1. human rights and equity Humanitarian actors should promote the human rights of all affected persons and protect individuals and groups who are at heightened risk of human rights violations. Humanitarian actors should also promote equity and non-discrimination. That is, as an advocacy tool, the guidelines are useful in promoting the need for particular they should aim to maximise fairness in the availability and accessibility of mental kinds of responses. Because they reflect inter-agency consensus and the insight of health and psychosocial supports among affected populations, across gender, age numerous practitioners worldwide, the guidelines have the support of many groups, language groups, ethnic groups and localities, according to identified needs. humanitarian agencies and actors. For this reason, they offer a useful advocacy tool in addressing gaps and also in promoting recommended responses – i.e. minimum, priority responses – even as the emergency occurs. For example, in a situation where 2. Participation Humanitarian action should maximise the participation of local affected  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 10 Proofread by: Approved by: populations in the humanitarian response. In most emergency situations, significant health and psychosocial well-being. a key principle – even in the early stages of numbers of people exhibit sufficient resilience to participate in relief and an emergency – is building local capacities, supporting self-help and strengthening reconstruction efforts. Many key mental health and psychosocial supports come the resources already present. Externally driven and implemented programmes often from affected communities themselves rather than from outside agencies. affected lead to inappropriate MHPss and frequently have limited sustainability. Where communities include both displaced and host populations and typically consist of possible, it is important to build both government and civil society capacities. multiple groups, which may compete with one another. Participation should enable at each layer of the pyramid see Figure 1, key tasks are to identify, mobilise and different sub-groups of local people to retain or resume control over decisions that strengthen the skills and capacities of individuals, families, communities and society. affect their lives, and to build the sense of local ownership that is important for achieving programme quality, equity and sustainability. From the earliest phase of an emergency, local people should be involved to the greatest extent possible in the assessment, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of assistance. 3. do no harm 5. Integrated support systems activities and programming should be integrated as far as possible. The proliferation of stand-alone services, such as those dealing only with rape survivors or only with people with a specific diagnosis, such as PTsD, can create a highly fragmented care system. activities that are integrated into wider systems e.g. Humanitarian aid is an important means of helping people affected by emergencies, existing community support mechanisms, formal/non-formal school systems, but aid can also cause unintentional harm . Work on mental general health services, general mental health services, social services, etc. tend health and psychosocial support has the potential to cause harm because it deals to reach more people, often are more sustainable, and tend to carry less stigma. with highly sensitive issues. also, this work lacks the extensive scientific evidence that is available for some other disciplines. Humanitarian actors may reduce the risk of harm in various ways, such as: • Participating in coordination groups to learn from others and to minimise duplication and gaps in response; 6. Multi-layered supports In emergencies, people are affected in different ways and require different kinds of supports. a key to organising mental health and psychosocial support is to develop a layered system of complementary supports that meets the needs of • Designing interventions on the basis of sufficient information see action different groups. This may be illustrated by a pyramid see Figure 1. all layers sheet 2.1; of the pyramid are important and should ideally be implemented concurrently. • committing to evaluation, openness to scrutiny and external review; • Developing cultural sensitivity and competence in the areas in which they intervene/work; • staying updated on the evidence base regarding effective practices; and • Developing an understanding of, and consistently reflecting on, universal human rights, power relations between outsiders and emergency-affected people, and the value of participatory approaches. 4. building on available resources and capacities i. basic services and security. The well-being of all people should be protected through the reestablishment of security, adequate governance and services that address basic physical needs food, shelter, water, basic health care, control of communicable diseases. In most emergencies, specialists in sectors such as food, health and shelter provide basic services. an MHPss response to the need for basic services and security may include: advocating that these services are put in place with responsible actors; documenting their impact on mental health and psychosocial well-being; and influencing humanitarian actors to deliver them in a way that promotes mental health and psychosocial well-being. These as described above, all affected groups have assets or resources that support mental basic services should be established in participatory, safe and socially appropriate 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 12 Proofread by: Approved by: Figure 1. Intervention pyramid for mental health and psychosocial support in emergencies. Each layer is described below. Specialised services Focused, non-specialised supports Community and family supports Basic services and security ways that protect local people’s dignity, strengthen local social supports and mobilise community networks see action sheet 5.1. ii. Community and family supports. The second layer represents the emergency response for a smaller number of people who are able to maintain their mental health and psychosocial well-being if they receive help in accessing key community and family supports. In most emergencies, there are significant disruptions of family and community networks due to loss, displacement, family separation, community fears and distrust. Moreover, even when family and community networks remain intact, people in emergencies will benefit from help in accessing greater community and family supports. Useful responses in this layer include family tracing and reunification, assisted mourning and communal healing ceremonies, mass communication on constructive coping methods, supportive parenting programmes, formal and non-formal educational activities, livelihood activities and the activation of social networks, such as through women’s groups and youth clubs. iii. Focused, non-specialised supports. The third layer represents the supports necessary for the still smaller number of people who additionally require more focused individual, family or group interventions by trained and supervised workers but who may not have had years of training in specialised care. For example, survivors of gender-based violence might need a mixture of emotional and livelihood support from community workers. This layer also includes psychological first aid PFa and basic mental health care by primary health care workers. iv. Specialised services. The top layer of the pyramid represents the additional support required for the small percentage of the population whose suffering, despite the supports already mentioned, is intolerable and who may have significant difficulties in basic daily functioning. This assistance should include psychological or psychiatric supports for people with severe mental disorders whenever their needs exceed the capacities of existing primary/general health services. such problems require either a referral to specialised services if they exist, or b initiation of longer-term training and supervision of primary/general health care providers. although specialised services are needed only for a small percentage of the population, in most large emergencies this group amounts to thousands of individuals. The uniqueness of each emergency and the diversity of cultures and socio-historic contexts makes it challenging to identify universal prescriptions of good practice. Nevertheless, experience from many different emergencies indicates that some actions are advisable, whereas others should typically be avoided. These are identified below as ‘Do’s’ and ‘Don’ts’ respectively.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 14 Proofread by: Approved by: Do’s Don’ts Do’s Don’ts Establish one overall coordination group on Do not create separate groups on mental health or Learn about and, where appropriate, use local Do not assume that all local cultural practices are mental health and psychosocial support. on psychosocial support that do not talk or cultural practices to support local people. helpful or that all local people are supportive of coordinate with one another. particular practices. Support a coordinated response, participating in Do not work in isolation or without thinking how Use methods from outside the culture where it is Do not assume that methods from abroad are coordination meetings and adding value by one’s own work fits with that of others. appropriate to do so. necessarily better or impose them on local people complementing the work of others. in ways that marginalise local supportive practices and beliefs. Collect and analyse information to determine Do not conduct duplicate assessments or accept whether a response is needed and, if so, what kind preliminary data in an uncritical manner. Build government capacities and integrate mental Do not create parallel mental health services for of response. health care for emergency survivors in general specific sub-populations. Tailor assessment tools to the local context. Do not use assessment tools not validated in the local, emergency-affected context. Recognise that people are affected by Do not assume that everyone in an emergency is emergencies in different ways. More resilient traumatised, or that people who appear resilient people may function well, whereas others may need no support. be severely affected and may need specialised supports. Ask questions in the local languages and in a Do not duplicate assessments or ask very safe, supportive manner that respects distressing questions without providing follow-up confidentiality. support. health services and, if available, in community mental health services. Organise access to a range of supports, including Do not provide one-off, single-session psychological first aid, to people in acute distress psychological debriefing for people in the general after exposure to an extreme stressor. population as an early intervention after exposure to conflict or natural disaster. Train and supervise primary/general health care Do not provide psychotropic medication or workers in good prescription practices and in psychological support without training and basic psychological support. supervision. Use generic medications that are on the essential Do not introduce new, branded medications in drug list of the country. contexts where such medications are not widely Pay attention to gender differences. Do not assume that emergencies affect men and used. women or boys and girls in exactly the same way, or that programmes designed for men will be of equal help or accessibility for women. Check references in recruiting staff and Do not use recruiting practices that severely volunteers and build the capacity of new personnel weaken existing local structures. from the local and/or affected community. After trainings on mental health and psychosocial Do not use one-time, stand-alone trainings or support, provide follow-up supervision and very short trainings without follow-up if preparing monitoring to ensure that interventions are people to perform complex psychological implemented correctly. interventions. Facilitate the development of community-owned, Do not use a charity model that treats people in managed and run programmes. the community mainly as beneficiaries of services. Build local capacities, supporting self-help and Do not organise supports that undermine or strengthening the resources already present in ignore local responsibilities and capacities. affected groups. Establish effective systems for referring and Do not establish screening for people with mental supporting severely affected people. disorders without having in place appropriate and accessible services to care for identified persons. Develop locally appropriate care solutions for Do not institutionalise people unless an people at risk of being institutionalised. institution is temporarily an indisputable last resort for basic care and protection. Use agency communication officers to promote Do not use agency communication officers to two-way communication with the affected communicate only with the outside world. population as well as with the outside world. Use channels such as the media to provide Do not create or show media images that accurate information that reduces stress and sensationalise people’s suffering or put people at enables people to access humanitarian services. risk. Seek to integrate psychosocial considerations Do not focus solely on clinical activities in the as relevant into all sectors of humanitarian absence of a multi-sectoral response. assistance.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 16 Proofread by: Approved by: Frequently asked questions 1. What is meant by mental health and psychosocial support? 5. the guidelines focus on minimum responses in the midst of emergencies, but what is an emergency and what is a minimum response? The annual Iasc consolidated appeal Process caP documents www.reliefweb. int provide useful examples of the situations that the Iasc considers to be emergencies. These include situations arising from armed conflicts and natural Mental health and psychosocial support MHPss is a composite term used disasters including food crises in which large segments of populations are at in these guidelines to describe any type of local or outside support that aims to acute risk of dying, immense suffering and/or losing their dignity. protect or promote psychosocial well-being and/or prevent or treat mental Minimum responses are essential, high-priority responses that should disorder. 2. Why do the guidelines use the overlapping terms mental health and psychosocial support? be implemented as soon as possible in an emergency. comprehensive responses should only be implemented after ascertaining that the population has access to at least the minimum response. For many aid workers these closely-related terms reflect different, yet 6. these guidelines are overwhelming. how can any one humanitarian actor complementary, approaches. agencies outside the health sector tend to speak agency, community do everything? do all the action sheets have to be of supporting psychosocial well-being. People working in the health sector tend implemented in every emergency? to speak of mental health, but historically have also used the terms psychosocial No single community or agency is expected to have the capacity to implement rehabilitation and psychosocial treatment to describe non-biological all necessary minimum response interventions in the midst of an emergency. interventions for people with mental disorders. Exact definitions of these terms The orientation of the guidelines is not towards individual agencies or projects. vary between and within aid organisations, disciplines and countries. Because these guidelines are inter-agency, they require coordinated action by 3. Are these guidelines for mental health professionals only? No, this publication offers guidance on how a wide range of actors in diverse sectors can protect and improve mental health and psychosocial well-being. However, some action sheets cover clinical interventions that should be implemented only under the leadership of mental health professionals. 4. Why do these guidelines cover sectors that are not within the traditional concern or expertise of mental health professionals? There is increasing inter-agency consensus that psychosocial concerns involve all sectors of humanitarian work, because the manner in which aid is implemented e.g. with/without concern for people’s dignity affects psychosocial well-being. a parallel may be drawn with multi-sectoral efforts to control mortality. Mortality rates are affected not only by vaccination campaigns and health care but also by actions in the water and sanitation, nutrition, food security and shelter sectors. similarly, psychosocial well-being is affected when shelters are overcrowded and sanitation facilities put women at risk of sexual violence. different actors to implement their various elements. Furthermore, the actions described as minimum response in the guidelines are likely to be minimum responses in most, but not all, emergencies. Local situation analyses are essential to determine what specific actions are priorities in the local context and at different points in time. 7. Why is there no timeline for when to implement actions? although the humanitarian aftermath of some disasters e.g. earthquakes, cyclones is predictable to some extent, many emergencies, such as those which arise from armed conflict, are unpredictable and defy a linear timeline. also, most complex emergencies persist for years. 8. What is the role of emergency-affected individuals, groups or communities in implementing these guidelines? although the document is written by aid organisations in the language of humanitarian aid, affected populations should be involved to the greatest extent  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 18 Proofread by: Approved by: possible in the design and implementation of all aid, and should play a lead role its own domain of work. Moreover, in any large emergency, one intersectoral, insofar as this is possible see action sheets 5.1 and 5.2. For this reason, the inter-agency mental health and psychosocial support coordination group should guidelines should be translated into relevant local languages. be established and should aim to secure compliance with guidelines such as those outlined in this document see action sheet 1.1 on coordination. 9. Why do the guidelines not focus on traumatic stress and post-traumatic stress disorder PtSd? 12. What is the IASC? The types of social and psychological problems that people may experience in The Inter-agency standing committee Iasc, established by the United Nations emergencies are extremely diverse see the section on ‘Problems’ on page 2. an General assembly, is an inter-agency forum for coordination, policy development exclusive focus on traumatic stress may lead to neglect of many other key mental and decision-making by the executive heads of key humanitarian agencies UN health and psychosocial issues. There is a wide range of opinion among agencies agencies, Red cross and Red crescent societies, and consortia of non-government and experts on the positive and negative aspects of focusing on traumatic stress. humanitarian organisations. see The present guidelines aim to provide a balanced approach of recommended about/default.asp. minimum actions in the midst of emergencies. The guidelines include a psychological first aid for people in acute trauma-induced distress by a variety of community workers see action sheets 4.3, 4.4, 5.2 and 6.1 and b care for people with severe mental disorders, including severe PTsD, by trained and supervised health staff only see action sheet 6.2. References 1. Anderson, M. 1999. Do No Harm: How aid can support peace – or war. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. 2. IASC 2003. Guidelines for HIV/AIDS Interventions in Emergency Settings. Geneva: IASC. 10. does this document aim to set standards? What is the relationship between these 3. IASC 2005. Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings. Geneva: guidelines and the Sphere handbook? IASC. This document outlines guidelines for minimum responses but does not set 4. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. standards for minimum response. This document is nevertheless consistent Geneva: Sphere Project. with sphere Project 2004 standards. Implementing the guidelines is likely to contribute to achieving relevant sphere standards, including the standard on Mental and social aspects of Health. 11. how do these IASC intersectoral guidelines relate to the IASC Cluster approach? The Iasc cluster approach is a new Iasc mechanism intended to improve the coordination and overall performance of sectors. Whenever necessary in an emergency, clusters are instituted to fill gaps in aid see humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/content/cluster. The following Iasc clusters have relevance to these mental health and psychosocial support guidelines: camp coordination and camp Management; Early Recovery; Education; Emergency shelter; Health; Nutrition; Protection; and Water, Hygiene and sanitation. During an emergency, each cluster should take responsibility for implementing the interventions covered in these guidelines that are relevant to  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Introduction  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 20 Proofread by: Approved by: c H a P T E R 2 Matrix of Interventions This chapter provides a matrix shown on the following pages, and also available in poster format, which provides guidelines on key actions for protecting and promoting mental health and psychosocial support in emergency settings. The matrix contains For purposes of coherence and readability, the matrix rows are grouped into cross- cutting functions, core mental health and psychosocial support domains, and social considerations in specific sectors. In addition, the matrix contains three columns that explain the types of response: 1. emergency Preparedness The left-hand column of the matrix summarises key recommended actions for emergency preparedness. Taking these actions should enable rapid implementation of minimum responses. 2. Minimum Response Interventions to be conducted in the midst of emergencies are described in the middle column of the matrix. Minimum responses are defined as high-priority responses that should be implemented as soon as possible in an emergency. These responses may be seen as providing the minimum supports to which affected populations are entitled. For each action listed in this middle column, there is a corresponding action sheet in chapter 3, which details the actions that in many emergencies comprise the minimum response. 3. Comprehensive Response The right-hand column in the matrix outlines a summary of recommended key interventions that form part of a comprehensive response. These interventions should be considered only once it is clear that the vast majority of communities are engaged in/are receiving the locally defined minimum response. These interventions are most often implemented during the stabilised phase and early reconstruction period following an emergency. Matrix of Interventions  ISAC Guidelines: Version m1 04/26/07 Page No. 22 Proofread by: Approved by: Mental health And Psychosocial Support MhPSS In emergency Settings: Matrix of Interventions Function or Domain Emergency Preparedness Part a. common functions across domains Minimum Response to be conducted even in the midst comprehensive Response potential additional response for stabilised phase of an emergency, but also as part and early reconstruction of a comprehensive response  Coordination • Identify qualified organisations and resource persons 1.1 Establish coordination of • Develop sustainable coordination structures, including • Develop agency and inter-agency national policies and plans for intersectoral mental health government and civil society stakeholders MHPSS emergency response and psychosocial support • Develop inter-agency strategic plans and promote joint MHPSS • Determine coordination mechanisms, roles and responsibilities at local, regional, national and international levels • Identify MHPSS focal points for emergencies in each region and from various agencies • Fundraise for MHPSS, including for MHPSS coordination • Integrate MHPSS considerations into all sectoral emergency preparedness plans • Advocate for MHPSS at all stages of humanitarian action programming and fundraising • Enhance information sharing among humanitarian actors • Link MHPSS emergency activities with development activities • Integrate MHPSS activities into national policies, plans and programmes and ensure that programmes utilise existing policies, plans and capacities  Assessment, monitoring • Build capacity in MHPSS assessment, monitoring and evaluation 2.1 Conduct assessments of mental • Conduct regular assessments and implement further and evaluation • Review and generate information on capacities and vulnerabilities health and psychosocial issues in-depth situation analyses as appropriate of communities • Assess emergency MHPSS response capacity of organisations • Develop inter-agency, culturally appropriate, rapid assessment plans and tools for emergencies • Collate and disseminate assessment information and tools • Develop or adapt strategies, indicators and tools for monitoring and evaluation • Review previous MHPSS responses and identify good practices, challenges and gaps for monitoring and evaluation • Monitor and evaluate programmes in relation to planned activities with pre-defined indicators • Monitor and evaluate MHPSS activities in relation to these guidelines • Disseminate results and lessons from assessment, monitoring and evaluation activities • Develop inter-agency indicators for MHPSS work in the transition phase  Protection and human rights standards • Promote human rights, international humanitarian law and • Strengthen national capacity to create awareness of, monitor, related good practices through mental health and report, prevent and seek redress for violations of human rights • Review existing policies and laws related to protection psychosocial support and humanitarian law • Develop mechanisms to monitor, report and seek redress for 3.2 Identify, monitor, prevent and • Strengthen accountability for human rights violations human rights violations respond to protection threats and • Strengthen capacities for social protection • Work with people at risk to identify priorities and develop capacities and strategies for protection and security • Train armed forces on international protection standards • Implement strategies to prevent violence, including gender- based violence failures through social protection • Review data and address gaps in services for people with specific needs at-risk groups respond to protection threats and • Institutionalise training on protection for workers across all abuses through legal protection sectors, including armed forces and the justice system  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Matrix of Interventions  ISAC Guidelines: Version m1 04/26/07 Page No. 24 Proofread by: Approved by: Function or Domain Emergency Preparedness Minimum Response to be conducted even in the midst comprehensive Response potential additional response for stabilised phase of an emergency, but also as part and early reconstruction of a comprehensive response • In the case of political violence, facilitate externally monitored agreements between opposing parties to protect civilians • Promote ratification and support implementation of international human rights/humanitarian law instruments • Promote the adoption and implementation of national legislation that supports human rights/humanitarian standards • Support safe community reintegration for people affected by all forms of violence • Limit easy access to alcohol in camp settings • Take steps to prevent human trafficking • Provide appropiate psychological, social, economic, educational and medical support to survivors of rights violations and their families, and to witnesses, inculding trial witnesses • Assist justice systems to implement laws according to international standards  Human resources • Map existing human resource capacity and training resources, • Develop a description of essential worker competencies that is including within the local population • Build awareness of need for workers who understand local culture and language engage volunteers who understand local culture locally relevant • Institutionalise, monitor and enforce codes of conduct and ethical standards, strengthening them as needed • Train all workers on international protection standards and and ethical guidelines • Map the distribution and extent of training and supervision codes of conduct • Train workers in different sectors on how to integrate MHPSS into emergency work following these guidelines • Expand the pool of available emergency workers trained in MHPSS • Encourage educational institutions to incorporate MHPSS training into professional programmes • Expand MHPSS in emergency preparation courses worldwide • Develop organisational policies and plans for the prevention and management of MHPSS problems in humanitarian workers • Develop organisational policies to maximise worker security and safety in the field received of aid workers in mental health and psychosocial support in mental health and psychosocial well-being among staff and volunteers • Scale up training and supervision and build sustainable capacity by institutionalising training • Review response to MHPSS issues in workers and adhere to organisations’ MHPSS policies for staff and volunteers Part B. core mental health and psychosocial support domains  Community mobilisation • Conduct participatory mapping and context analysis of local • Facilitate strengthening of community ownership of response and support communities current situation, resources, divisions, services and practices • Conduct risk analysis, develop a community response plan, including an early warning system, and strengthen local capacity to implement such plans • Develop mechanisms for mobilisation of internal MHPSS resources and integration of external resources • Train and supervise existing community workers on how to provide appropriate emergency MHPSS support • Develop community-owned and -managed social support activities • Develop community plans on protecting and supporting early childhood development in emergencies community mobilisation, ownership and control of emergency response in all sectors • Strengthen livelihoods and support implementation of community and economic development initiatives • Provide the space for victims and survivors to discuss issues of reparation economic, judicial, symbolic to be addressed by responsible parties and social support • Facilitate recording of historical memory of how the community has dealt with the emergency appropriate communal cultural, • Review mobilisation of community resources and facilitate spiritual and religious healing expansion and improvement of quality of community social practices supports and self-help • Strengthen the MHPSS system, including referral mechanisms children 0–8 years and their • Explore possibilities to deinstitutionalise orphanages and care-givers custodial homes and facilitate alternative community-based care • Develop conflict resolution and peace-building programmes  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Matrix of Interventions  ISAC Guidelines: Version m1 04/26/07 Page No. 26 Proofread by: Approved by: Function or Domain Emergency Preparedness Minimum Response to be conducted even in the midst comprehensive Response potential additional response for stabilised phase of an emergency, but also as part and early reconstruction of a comprehensive response • Facilitate community-based reintegration of children recruited or used by armed forces or groups • Exhume mass graves in a culturally appropriate manner, supporting relatives and friends • Organise discussions on helpful and harmful traditional practices • Build capacities to provide quality care for young children and their care-givers  Health services • Strengthen the national capacity of health systems for providing • Initiate updating of mental health policy and legislation, MHPSS in emergencies social considerations in provision as appropriate • Map existing formal and non-formal resources and practices • Promote gender- and age-disaggregated health information systems that cover essential mental health data • Train staff in culturally appropriate clinical care of survivors of gender-based and other violence • Orient health staff in psychological first aid • Bring the national essential drug list in line with the WHO Model Essential Drug List and prepare emergency stocks of essential psychotropic medications • Develop emergency preparedness plans for institutions • Implement strategies for reducing discrimination and stigma of people with mental illness and/or mental disability • Develop capacity to prevent and address harm related to alcohol and other substance use of general health care • Develop the availability of mental health care for a broad range of emergency-related and pre-existing mental disorders through with severe mental disorders general health care and community-based mental health services severe mental disorders and other mental and neurological disabilities living in institutions appropriate, collaborate with local, indigenous and traditional health systems and other substance use • Work to ensure the sustainability of newly established mental health services • Continue to foster collaborative relationships with local healing systems, as appropriate • For people in psychiatric institutions, facilitate community-based care and appropriate alternative living arrangements • Conduct regular assessments of the accessibility and quality of mental health care • Expand efforts to prevent harm related to alcohol and other substance use  Education • Map existing resources for formal and non-formal educational • Expand educational opportunities for adolescent girls and boys, practices supportive education including vocational training, and start adult literacy courses • Determine levels of education and vocational options for girls, boys and adults who may have missed out on education • Using participatory methods, train and supervise teachers in basic psychosocial support, children’s rights, participatory methods, positive discipline and codes of conduct • Strengthen the capacity of national education systems for school-based MHPSS in emergencies • Establish general and psychosocial crisis plans for schools • Strengthen emergency education capacities, addressing prominent protection issues in the curriculum • Ensure that education curricula are sensitive to culture, diversity and gender issues • Monitor and improve the quality of education • Expand educational opportunities for girls and boys and start adult literacy courses • Provide livelihood and other necessary supports to enable participation in education and prevent drop-out • Expand capacities for psychosocial support within formal and non-formal education settings • Strengthen prevention of and response to violence and other forms of abuse and exploitation in schools • Integrate peace-building and life skills into education  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Matrix of Interventions  ISAC Guidelines: Version m1 04/26/07 Page No. 28 Proofread by: Approved by: Function or Domain Emergency Preparedness Minimum Response to be conducted even in the midst comprehensive Response potential additional response for stabilised phase of an emergency, but also as part and early reconstruction of a comprehensive response  Dissemination of information • Map existing information-related resources and gaps in • Support reliable and accessible systems of accurate resources • Educate staff on ethical aspects of information gathering • Make information accessible to different target audiences • Prepare a ‘risk communication’ strategy for disseminating essential information during emergencies • Distribute information on how to prevent problems such as family separation in emergencies • Advocate against media use of harmful images and the distribution of inappropriate information • Involve key stakeholders in developing, pilot-testing and distributing information on positive coping affected population on the dissemination of information emergency, relief efforts and • Strengthen community participation in validating and their legal rights disseminating information • Provide continuous access to information on the availability about positive coping methods of assistance • Conduct information campaigns on supporting people with mental health and psychosocial problems • Monitor and evaluate use of communication materials Part c. social considerations in sectoral domains  Food security and nutrition 0 Shelter and site planning • Assess the population’s pre-existing food preparation habits, • Review and organise regular assessments on social and beliefs and main staples • Monitor access to key micronutrients known to influence child psychological development • Plan and develop equitable distribution according to needs psychological considerations psychological considerations in provision of food security and safe aid for all in dignity, nutrition considering cultural practices • Encourage and support food self-sufficiency and household roles in the provision of food and nutritional support • Map social dimensions of existing resources, gaps, practices • Review and organise regular assessments of social and at-risk groups regarding shelter and site planning • Conduct participatory assessments on safety and appropriateness of potential sites • Plan to provide emergency shelter for all people with appropriate targeting of people at risk in a manner that supports safety, dignity, privacy and empowerment • Plan to prevent people being placed in camps long-term • Plan for the heating of shelters in emergencies involving cold climates considerations safe, dignified, considerations in shelter and site planning culturally and socially • Address equity issues in distributing land and in legislation appropriate assistance in site on land rights planning and shelter provision, in a coordinated manner • Build community and government capacities for integrating social considerations into longer-term shelter and site planning  Water and sanitation • Map social dimensions of existing resources, gaps and at-risk groups regarding water and sanitation • Plan to provide water and sanitation for all people with appropriate targeting of people at risk in a manner that supports safety, dignity, privacy and non-violent problem solving • Review and organise regular assessments of social considerations safe and considerations in the provision of water and sanitation culturally appropriate access • Build community and government capacities for integrating social for all in dignity in the provision considerations into longer-term water and sanitation supports of water and sanitation  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Matrix of Interventions  ISAC Guidelines: Version m1 04/26/07 Page No. 30 Proofread by: Approved by: c H a P T E R 3 action sheets for Minimum Response this chapter contains the Action Sheets for minimum response. there is one Action Sheet for each action covered in the middle Minimum Response column of the matrix provided in Chapter 2. Function or Domain Title of action sheet a. common functions across domains  Coordination 1.1 Establish coordination of intersectoral mental health and psychosocial support  Assessment, monitoring and evaluation psychosocial issues  Protection and human rights 3.1 Apply a human rights framework through mental health standards and psychosocial support and failures through social protection 3.3 Identify, monitor, prevent and respond to protection threats and abuses through legal protection  Human resources understand local culture 4.3 Organise orientation and training of aid workers in mental health and psychosocial support 4.4 Prevent and manage problems in mental health and psychosocial well-being among staff and volunteers B. core mental health and psychosocial support domains  Community mobilisation and support and control of emergency response in all sectors spiritual and religious healing practices action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version m1 04/26/07 Page No. 32 Proofread by: Approved by: Function or Domain Title of action sheet  Health services care-givers action sheet 1.1 Establish coordination of intersectoral mental health and psychosocial support Function: coordination Phase: Minimum Response background Effective mental health and psychosocial support MHPss programming requires intersectoral coordination among diverse actors, as all participants in the humanitarian response have responsibilities to promote mental health and psychosocial well-being. MHPss coordination must include health, education, protection and social services, and representatives of affected communities. It must provision of general health care also engage with the food, security, shelter, and water and sanitation sectors. coordination helps to ensure that a all aspects of the humanitarian response and other mental and neurological disabilities living in institutions indigenous and traditional health systems   Education Dissemination of information are implemented in a way that promotes mental health/psychosocial well-being; b specific mental health and psychosocial supports are included in the humanitarian response. In order to do this, MHPss actors must agree on an overall strategy and division of labour that equitably support emergency-affected communities. Poor coordination can lead to ineffective, inefficient, inappropriate or even harmful programming. a number of key difficulties exist in ensuring appropriate coordination. emergency, relief efforts and their legal rights Bridging the gap between ‘mental health’ and ‘psychosocial’ programming often associated, respectively, with the health and protection sectors is a key challenge c. social considerations in sectoral domains in many emergencies. coordination has been especially challenging in high-profile emergencies involving large numbers of actors. affected populations can be  Food security and nutrition 9.1 Include specific social and psychological considerations overwhelmed by outsiders, and local contributions to mental health and psychosocial safe aid for all in dignity, considering cultural practices and household roles in the provision of food and nutritional support support are easily marginalised or undermined. Building common understandings among actors with diverse views on MHPss for instance, national governments, 0 Shelter and site planning donors, international organisations, local communities and NGOs and ensuring culturally and socially appropriate assistance in site planning and shelter provision, in a coordinated manner timely resolution of shared problems are key to effective coordination.  Water and sanitation appropriate access for all in dignity in the provision of water and sanitation Key actions 1. Activate or establish an intersectoral MHPSS coordination group. • Form a group to coordinate MHPss action and jointly develop a plan stating what will be done and by whom. Forming a single intersectoral MHPss coordination group, including actors traditionally associated with both the health and protection  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 34 Proofread by: Approved by: sectors, is recommended. This is the most effective way to reduce fragmentation is not contradictory to the principle of ‘do no harm’. Organisations should make and to ensure that all aspects of MHPss, from community-based social support efforts to ensure that their representatives have the authority, knowledge and skills to treatment for severe mental disorders, are addressed in an integrated manner. to participate effectively in coordination. However, it can be helpful to establish sub-groups to address specific issues e.g. psychosocial support in schools, mental health care in health services. The MHPss coordination group should coordinate with all relevant sectors or Iasc clusters to ensure that their activities are conducted in a way that promotes mental health and psychosocial well-being and that relevant MHPss actions are undertaken in these clusters. • Include in the MHPss coordination group representatives from key government ministries such as ministries of health, social welfare and education, UN agencies and NGOs. Participants from other organisations, such as government ministries, professional associations and universities, religious or community-based 2. Coordinate programme planning and implementation. • The coordination group is responsible for coordinating programme planning and implementation in relation to these guidelines. This includes ensuring that minimum MHPss actions are carried out as appropriate in the local situation and that they reach emergency-affected communities equitably and in a timely manner. • Facilitation of the process of intersectoral, inter-agency MHPss strategic planning includes: • coordinating assessments and communicating findings see action sheet 2.1; organisations and Red cross/Red crescent movements, should be included when • Establishing agreed programming and geographical priorities; they are active in MHPss. community consultation and input should be actively encouraged at all levels of coordination. • Use existing coordination groups if available. If not, ad hoc groups should be established. The MHPss coordination group should coordinate with the Protection and Health clusters and, where appropriate, with any additional national coordinating mechanisms, including relevant websites e.g. the Humanitarian Information centre, www.humanitarianinfo.org. • Establish MHPss coordination groups at the sub-national and/or national level. In addition, encourage information exchange between organisations at the international level. There must be communication between national and • Identifying and working to fill gaps in responses; • Ensuring a functional division of labour amongst actors; • Facilitating inter-agency cooperation on joint actions such as referral mechanisms or joint trainings; • coordinating the dissemination of information about the emergency, relief efforts, legal rights and self-care amongst the affected population see action sheets 8.1 and 8.2; • Documenting and sharing information on agency approaches, materials and lessons learned; sub-national coordination groups, with clear definition of their respective roles. • Monitoring and evaluation and communicating findings see action sheet 2.2. • MHPss coordination groups should be led where possible by one or more If appropriate, an inter-agency strategic plan should be developed. national organisations, with appropriate technical support from international organisations. Lead organisations should be knowledgeable in MHPss and skilled in inclusive coordination processes e.g. avoiding dominance by a particular approach/ sector or, in situations of armed conflict, perceived as impartial by key actors. • Work to reduce power differences between members of the coordination group and to facilitate the participation of under-represented or less powerful groups e.g. by using local languages and considering the structure and location of meetings. 3. Develop and disseminate guidelines and coordinate advocacy. • The MHPss coordination group should lead the process of adapting these and other relevant guidelines to the local context. It should develop additional MHPss guidelines/policies when needed. This process should be as inclusive as possible. Mechanisms to ensure broad awareness of and commitment to guidelines and policies need to be developed e.g. formal adoption by national • all organisations have a responsibility to coordinate their responses provided this authorities and organisations working on MHPss.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  example: Aceh, Indonesia, 2005 • During the humanitarian operations following the December 2004 tsunami, the province’s health authorities were collaboratively assisted by two UN organisations in coordinating all efforts related to mental health and psychosocial support. • an aceh Inter-agency Psychosocial Working Group was established. More than 60 agencies working in the social, health and protection sectors participated in weekly meetings. The psychosocial group reported to both health and child protection coordination groups. • The aceh Inter-agency Psychosocial Working Group drafted the ‘Psychosocial Programme Principles for aceh, Indonesia’, which were widely promoted and used. ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 36 Proofread by: Approved by: • The group should coordinate advocacy for MHPss. Key minimum actions are: 1 agree upon key advocacy issues by determining which factors have the greatest impact on MHPss and which are most likely to be changed through advocacy; 2 identify key stakeholders such as government, armed groups, media, donors, NGOs, policy-makers and other coordinating bodies, and develop targeted key messages for each; and 3 determine roles and responsibilities for advocacy by different organisations. 4. Mobilise resources. • coordination of fundraising includes ensuring that MHPss is appropriately included in any consolidated appeals Process, as well as identifying and mobilising funds for coordination activities and joint advocacy to donors. Key resources 1. Inter-Agency Working Group on Separated and Unaccompanied Children 2005. Psychosocial Care and Protection of Tsunami Affected Children: Inter-Agency Guiding Principles. 2. The Mangrove: Psychosocial Support and Coordination Unit, Batticaloa, Sri Lanka. 3. Psychosocial/Mental Health Coordination. Inter-governmental Meeting of Experts Final Report, Annex V, Jakarta, 4-5 April 2005. 4. Palestinian Code of Conduct for Psycho-Social Interventions, 4 October 2001. 5. World Health Organization 2003. Mental Health in Emergencies: Mental and Social Aspects of Health in Populations Exposed to Extreme Stressors. Geneva: WHO. Sample process indicator • an MHPss coordination group is established at the local and/or national level, integrating actors from various sectors, including health, protection and education.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 38 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 2.1 conduct assessments of mental health and psychosocial issues Function: assessment, monitoring and evaluation Phase: Minimum Response background Mental health and psychosocial support MHPss assessments in emergencies provide a an understanding of the emergency situation; b an analysis of threats to and capacities for mental health and psychosocial well-being; and c an analysis of relevant resources to determine, in consultation with stakeholders, whether a response is required and, if so, the nature of the response.¹ an assessment should include documenting people’s experiences of the emergency, how they react to it and how this affects their mental health/psychosocial well-being. It should include how individuals, communities and organisations respond to the emergency. It must assess resources, as well as needs and problems. Resources include individual coping/life skills, social support mechanisms, community action and government and NGO capacities. Understanding how to support affected populations to more constructively address MHPss needs is essential. an assessment • Organisations should inform the coordination group see action sheet 1.1 on which issues they are conducting assessments, as well as where and how, and should be prepared to adapt their assessments if necessary and to share information. • In most emergencies, different groups government departments, UN organisations, NGOs, etc. will collect information on different aspects of MHPss as outlined in the table on pages 40-41 in a range of geographical areas. The coordination group should help to identify which organisations will collect which kinds of information, and where, and ensure as far as possible that all the information outlined in the table is available for the affected area. It should support organisations to do this in an appropriate and coordinated manner e.g. by standardising key tools. This assessment information should be regularly collated, analysed and shared among the various organisations involved. • specific social considerations should be included in assessments carried out by all sectors, including community services, protection, health, education, shelter, food, and water and sanitation see relevant action sheets for each sector/domain. must also be part of an ongoing process of collecting and analysing data in 2. Collect and analyse key information relevant to mental health and collaboration with key stakeholders, especially the affected community, for the psychosocial support. purposes of improved programming. Key actions 1. Ensure that assessments are coordinated. • coordinate assessments with other organisations that are assessing psychosocial/ mental health issues. coordinating assessments is essential to ensure efficient use The table overleaf outlines the main information that needs to be available to organisations working on MHPss note that individual organisations will focus on specific aspects particularly relevant to their work. • The assessment should collect information disaggregated by age, sex and location whenever possible. This includes identifying at-risk groups in the community and their particular needs/capacities. Groups commonly at risk are described in chapter 1. of resources, achieve the most accurate and comprehensive understanding of the • address both the needs and resources of different sections of the affected MHPss situation and avoid burdening a population unnecessarily with duplicated population, from distressed people who are functioning well to those who are not assessments. functioning because of severe mental disorder. • Organisations should first determine what assessments have been done and should review available information e.g. conduct a desk review, interview other organisations, review existing information on the country, such as relevant pre-existing ethnographic literature and data on the mental health system. They should design further field assessments only if they are necessary. ¹ Definition adapted from the Sphere Handbook 2004.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 40 Proofread by: Approved by: Type of information Including Type of information Including Relevant demographic and • Population size and size and, where relevant, location of contextual information relevant sub-groups of the population who may be at particular risk see Chapter 1 • Mortality and threats to mortality • Access to basic physical needs e.g. food, shelter, water and sanitation, health care and education • Human rights violations and protective frameworks see Action Sheets 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 • Social, political, religious and economic structures and dynamics e.g. security and conflict issues, including ethnic, religious, class and gender divisions within communities • Changes in livelihood activities and daily community life • Basic ethnographic information on cultural resources, norms, roles and attitudes e.g. mourning practices, attitudes towards mental disorder and gender-based violence, help-seeking behaviour • Types of social support identifying skilled and trusted helpers in a community and sources of community solidarity e.g. continuation of normal community activities, inclusive decision-making, inter-generational dialogue/respect, support for marginalised or at-risk groups Organisational capacities • Structure, locations, staffing and resources of psychosocial and activities support programmes in education and social services and the impact of the emergency on services • Structure, locations, staffing and resources for mental health care in the health sector including policies, availability of medications, role of primary health care and mental hospitals etc. – see WHO Mental Health Atlas for baseline data on • Mapping psychosocial skills of community actors e.g. community workers, religious leaders or counsellors • Mapping of potential partners and the extent and quality/ content of previous MHPSS training Experience of the emergency • People’s experiences of the emergency perceptions of events • Mapping of emergency MHPSS programmes and their importance, perceived causes, expected consequences Mental health and psychosocial problems • Signs of psychological and social distress, including behavioural and emotional problems e.g. aggression, social withdrawal, sleep problems and local indicators of distress Programming needs • Recommendations by different stakeholders and opportunities • Extent to which different key actions outlined in these IASC guidelines are implemented • Functionality of referral systems between and within health, social, education, community and religious sectors • Signs of impaired daily functioning • Disruption of social solidarity and support mechanisms e.g. disruption of social support patterns, familial conflicts, violence, undermining of shared values • Information on people with severe mental disorders e.g. through health services information systems see Action Sheet 6.2 for details 3. Conduct assessments in an ethical and appropriately participatory manner. • Participation assessments must, as far as is possible, be a participatory and collaborative process with the relevant stakeholders, including governments, NGOs and community and religious organisations, as well as affected populations. Existing sources of • Ways people help themselves and others i.e. ways of coping/ Participatory assessment is the first step in a dialogue with affected populations, psychosocial well-being and mental health healing e.g. religious or political beliefs, seeking support from family/friends • Ways in which the population may previously have dealt with adversity which, if done well, not only provides information but may also help people to take control of their situation by collaboratively identifying problems, resources and potential solutions see action sheets 5.1 and 5.2. Feedback on the results and process of the assessment should be sought from participants. The affected population should also be involved in defining well-being and distress. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 42 Proofread by: Approved by: • Inclusiveness The assessment must involve diverse sections of the affected literature review, group activities e.g. focus group discussions, key informant population, including children, youth, women, men, elderly people and different interviews, observations and site visits. Quantitative methods, such as short religious, cultural and socio-economic groups. It should aim to include community questionnaires and reviews of existing data in health systems, can also be helpful. leaders, educators and health and community workers and to correct, not reinforce, as far as is possible, multiple sources of data should be used to cross-check and patterns of exclusion. • Analysis assessments should analyse the situation with a focus on identifying priorities for action, rather than merely collecting and reporting information. • Attention to conflict When operating in situations of conflict, assessors must be aware of the parties involved in the conflict and of their dynamics. care must be taken to maintain impartiality and independence and to avoid inflaming social tensions/conflict or endangering community members or staff. Participatory assessments may not be advisable in some situations, where asking questions may endanger interviewers or interviewees. • Cultural appropriateness assessment methodologies including indicators and instruments should be culturally and contextually sensitive and relevant. The assessment team should include individuals familiar with the local context, who are – as far as is known – not distrusted by interviewees, and should respect local cultural traditions and practices. assessments should aim to avoid using validate information/analysis. surveys that seek to assess the distribution of rates of emergency-induced mental disorders psychiatric epidemiological surveys tend to be challenging, resource-intensive and, too frequently, controversial – and, as such, they are beyond minimum response see page 45. Using existing data from the literature to make approximate projections can be a useful alternative see action sheet 6.2 for an example of such projections. • Dynamism and timeliness assessments should be sufficiently rapid for their results to be used effectively in the planning of emergency programming. It is often appropriate to have a dynamic, phased assessment process consisting, for instance, of two phases: 1. initial ‘rapid’ assessment focusing mostly on understanding the experiences and the current situation of the affected population, together with community and organisational capacities and programming gaps. This should normally be conducted within 1–2 weeks. terminology that in the local cultural context could contribute to stigmatisation. 2. Detailed assessments: more rigorously conducted assessments • ethical principles Privacy, confidentiality and the best interests of the interviewees must be respected. In line with the principle of ‘do no harm’, care must be taken to avoid raising unrealistic expectations during assessments e.g. interviewees should understand that assessors may not return if they do not receive funding. Intrusive questioning should be avoided. Organisations must make every effort to ensure that the participation of community members in the assessment is genuinely voluntary. Persons interviewing children or other groups with particular needs such as survivors of gender-based violence should possess appropriate skills and experience. Whenever possible, support must be given to respondents in need to access available MHPss services. • Assessment teams assessors should be trained in the ethical principles mentioned above and should possess basic interviewing and good interpersonal skills. assessment teams should have an appropriate gender balance and should be knowledgeable both in MHPss and the local context. • data collection methods Relevant qualitative methods of data collection include addressing the various issues outlined in the table above are conducted as the emergency unfolds. 4. Collate and disseminate assessment results. • Organisations should share the results of their assessments in a timely and accessible manner with the community, the coordination group and with other relevant organisations. Information that is private, that could identify individuals or particular communities, or that could endanger members of the affected population or staff members should not be disclosed publicly. such information should be shared only in the interest of protecting affected people or staff members, and then only with relevant actors. • The coordination group should document, collate, review and disseminate assessment results to all stakeholders e.g. post assessments on the internet and conduct feedback sessions with communities.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 44 Proofread by: Approved by: • MHPss actors must use assessments as a resource and guide for planning, monitoring and evaluating programming see action sheet 2.2. Key resources 1. Action by Churches Together ACT Alliance, Lutherhjalpen, Norwegian Church Aid and Presbyterian Disaster Services 2005. Community Assessment of Psychosocial Support Needs. Chapter 6, Community Based Psychosocial Services: A Facilitator’s Guide. 2. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP 2003. Participation of Crisis-Affected Populations in Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners. Assessments, Chapter 3. 3. Bolton P. 2001. Cross-Cultural Assessment of Trauma-Related Mental Illness Phase II. CERTI, Johns Hopkins University, World Vision. 4. Médecins Sans Frontières 2005. Field Assessments. Chapter 1, Part III, Mental Health Guidelines: A Handbook for Implementing Mental Health Programmes in Areas of Mass Violence. 5. Silove D., Manicavasagar V., Baker K., Mausiri M., Soares M., de Carvalho F., Soares A. and Fonseca Amiral Z. 2004. ‘Indices of social risk among first attenders of an emergency mental health service in post-conflict East Timor: an exploratory investigation’. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry. 38:929-32. 6. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. Initial Assessment, pp.29-33. 7. UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Office and Regional Emergency Psychosocial Support Network 2005. Handbook of Psychosocial Assessment for Children and Communities in Emergencies. 8. World Health Organization 2005. Mental Health Atlas. Sample process indicators • Organisations design their assessments taking into account and building upon the psychosocial/mental health information already collected by other organisations. • assessment information on MHPss issues from various organisations as outlined in the table pages 40- 41 is collated and disseminated e.g. by the coordination group. epidemiological surveys of mental disorder and distress Epidemiological surveys in the general population can a provide population-level rates of different mental disorders and signs of distress and b identify associated risk factors e.g. being female, protective factors e.g. having work, service utilisation rates and factors affecting help-seeking. such surveys, if well conducted, can be used for programme planning, advocacy, developing an improved evidence base for programmes and advancing scientific knowledge. Moreover, if repeated, they can monitor whether natural recovery spontaneous recovery without planned intervention is occurring for many people in the population. However, there are many challenges in conducting useful and valid epidemiological surveys in emergencies. To date, the vast majority of such surveys have been unsuccessful in distinguishing between mental disorders and non- pathological distress. The instruments used in such surveys have usually been validated only outside emergency situations in help-seeking, clinical populations, for whom distress is more likely a sign of psychopathology than it would be for the average person in the community in an emergency. as a consequence, many surveys of this type appear to have overestimated rates of mental disorder, suggesting incorrectly that substantial proportions of the population would benefit from clinical psychological or psychiatric care. similarly, the instruments used in the vast majority of past surveys have not been validated for the culture in which they have been applied, which creates further uncertainty over how to interpret results. Experience has shown that it requires considerable expertise to conduct sound psychiatric surveys in a sufficiently rapid manner to substantially influence programmes in the midst of an emergency. although well-conducted psychiatric surveys may be part of a comprehensive response, such surveys go beyond minimum responses, which are defined in these guidelines as essential, high-priority responses that should be implemented as soon as possible in an emergency see chapter 1. If psychiatric epidemiological surveys are conducted in emergency-affected contexts, special attention should be given to a validating the instruments for the local situation see Key resource 3 above and b including assessment of indicators that are potentially related to severe mental health problems e.g. suicidal tendencies; inability to provide life-sustaining care of self/family; bizarre behaviour; dangerousness to others; and locally defined indicators of severely impaired daily functioning: see Key resource 5.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 46 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 2.2 Initiate participatory systems for monitoring and evaluation Function: assessment, monitoring and evaluation Phase: Minimum Response background assessment, planning, monitoring and evaluation are part of the same programme cycle. Monitoring in emergencies is the systematic process of collecting and analysing inform- ation to inform humanitarian decision-making related to ongoing or potential new activities. Evaluation includes the analysis of the relevance and effectiveness of ongoing or completed activities. In short, the aim of monitoring and evaluation M&E in emergencies is to improve humanitarian action by collecting information on the implementation and impact of aid and using it to guide programme improvements in a changing context. of process indicators. • Outcome indicators describe changes in the lives of the population according to pre-defined objectives. These indicators aim to describe the extent to which the intervention was a success or a failure. although certain outcome indicators are likely to be meaningful in most contexts e.g. level of daily functioning, deciding what is understood by ‘success’ in a psychosocial programme should form part of participatory discussions with the affected population. although process and satisfaction indicators are useful tools for learning from experience, outcome indicators provide the strongest data for informed action. • collecting data on indicators in the midst of emergencies provides baseline information not only for minimum responses such as those outlined in this document but also for long-term, comprehensive humanitarian action. M&E should preferably be based on participatory approaches see Key • Indicators should be sMaRT specific, Measurable, achievable, Relevant resources below. This means that affected communities should participate to the and Time-bound. maximum extent possible in all aspects of the M&E process, including the discussion of results and their implications see action sheet 5.1 for a description of different levels of community involvement. • Typically, only a few indicators can feasibly be monitored over time. Indicators should therefore be chosen on the principle of ‘few but powerful’. They should be defined in such a way that they can be easily assessed, without interfering with action sheet 2.1 focuses on assessment and describes the kinds of data to the daily work of the team or the community. be collected as part of an initial assessment. This action sheet focuses on subsequent monitoring and evaluation activities. • Data on indicators should be disaggregated by age, gender and location whenever possible. Key actions 1. Define a set of indicators for monitoring, according to defined objectives and activities. • The exact choice of indicators depends on the goals of the programme and on what is important and feasible in the emergency situation. 2. Conduct assessments in an ethical and appropriately participatory manner. • For monitoring and evaluation, the same measurement principles apply as for assessment. see Key action 3 of action sheet 2.1 for a detailed discussion of issues related to participation, inclusiveness, analysis, conflict situations, cultural appropriateness, ethical principles, assessment teams and data collection methods, • Process, satisfaction and outcome indicators should be formulated consistent with including psychiatric epidemiology. pre-defined objectives. • For monitoring and evaluating interventions, indicators need to be measured • Process indicators describe activities and cover the quality, quantity, coverage first before and then after the intervention to see if there has been any change. and utilisation of services and programmes e.g. number of self-help meetings. However, a much more rigorous design would be required to determine whether • Satisfaction indicators describe the satisfaction of the affected population with the activity e.g. the number of people expressing a negative, neutral or positive opinion of a programme. satisfaction indicators may be seen as a sub-type the intervention has caused the change. such designs tend to go beyond minimum response, which in this document is defined as essential, high-priority responses that should be implemented as soon as possible in an emergency.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 48 Proofread by: Approved by: • Quantitative data should be complemented with relevant qualitative data e.g. testimonials of people’s experiences of the intervention. %20and%20Monographs 3. Use monitoring for reflection, learning and change. • Data on selected indicators may be collected periodically, starting during an emergency, with ongoing follow-up in subsequent months or years. For instance, if a specific type of assessment and analysis is conducted in the midst of an emergency, the same process can be repeated at later intervals e.g. at six, 12 and 18 months to investigate changes and to help stakeholders rethink actions as necessary. • Key conclusions from monitoring and evaluation should be distributed to all relevant stakeholders, including the government, coordination bodies and the affected population. Information for the affected population should be distributed in an accessible form e.g. in local languages and intelligible to people with low levels of literacy. • To facilitate reflection, learning and change, participatory dialogues are useful as 6. International Institute for Environment and Development IIED. Participatory Learning and Action PLA Notes. see specifically notes 31 and 42, which cover PRA monitoring and evaluations 7. Psychosocial Working Group 2005. Reflections on Identifying Objectives and Indicators for Psychosocial Programming. 8. Perez-Sales P. 2006. ‘Repensar Experiencas. Evaluación de programas psicosociales y de salud mental. Metodologías y técnicas’. Ed Popular. www.psicosocial.net ‘Rethinking experiences. Assessment of mental health and psychosocial programmes. Methods and techniques’, in Spanish Sample process indicators • sMaRT process and outcome indicators are defined for mental health and psychosocial support programmes. • Indicators are regularly assessed, as appropriate. a means of stepping back and reflecting on what the data mean and how to adjust • Key stakeholders, including the affected population, are involved in all aspects activities in light of what has been learned. of the M&E process, including the discussion of results and their implications. Key resources 1. Action Aid International. Participatory Vulnerability Analysis: A step-by-step guide for field staff. 2. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP. Chapter 6: ‘Monitoring’; Chapter 7: ‘Evaluation’. In Participation by Crisis-Affected Populations in Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners, pp.193-227. 3. Bolton P. and Tang A.M. 2002. ‘An alternative approach to cross-cultural function assessment’. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology. 37:537-43. 4. Bragin M. 2005. ‘The community participatory evaluation tool for psychosocial programmes: A guide to implementation’. Intervention: International Journal of Mental Health, Psychosocial Work and Counselling in Areas of Armed Conflict 3, 3-24. 5. Cohen R.N. 2004. Introducing Tracer Studies: Guidelines for Implementing Tracer Studies in Early Childhood Programmes available in English and Spanish. Bernard van Leer Foundation. example: el Salvador, 2001 • Local authorities and a psychosocial community team from a local university and an international NGO set up an M&E system in a camp of 12,000 people affected by an earthquake. • The system gathered quantitative and qualitative data on mutual support, solidarity, security, leadership, decision-making processes, access to updated information, perception of authorities, employment, normalising activities, perception of community cohesion and perception of the future. The system involved a baseline survey with regular three-month follow-ups in a random sample of 75 tents. On each occasion, data were collected within a 24-hour period by five volunteers. • after three months, the M&E system detected a substantial decrease in perceived mutual support and solidarity. appropriate measures were taken e.g. rearrangement of the distribution of tents and cooking facilities, group activities. Three months later the survey showed an increase in confidence in leadership and decision- making processes, indicating that the trend had been reversed.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 50 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 3.1 apply a human rights framework through mental health and psychosocial support Function: Protection and human rights standards Phase: Minimum Response background Human rights violations are pervasive in most emergencies. Many of the defining features of emergencies – displacement, breakdown in family and social structures, health and psychosocial well-being, mental health and psychosocial workers have a dual responsibility. First, as indicated in key actions 1–3 below, they should ensure that mental health and psychosocial programmes support human rights. second, as indicated in actions 4–5 below, they should accept the responsibilities of all humanitarian workers, regardless of sector, to promote human rights and to protect at-risk people from abuse and exploitation. lack of humanitarian access, erosion of traditional value systems, a culture of violence, Key actions weak governance, absence of accountability and a lack of access to health services – entail violations of human rights. The disregard of international human rights standards is often among the root causes and consequences of armed conflict. also, human rights violations and poor governance can exacerbate the impact of natural disasters. Groups who may be at particular risk in emergencies are outlined in chapter 1 and include people who are under threat for political reasons. such people are more likely to suffer rights violations and to face increased risks of 1. Advocate for compliance with international human rights standards in all forms of mental health and psychosocial support in emergencies. • Promote inclusive and non-discriminatory service delivery, avoid unnecessary institutionalisation of people with mental disorders, and respect freedom of thought, conscience and religion in mental health and psychosocial care. • Help recipients of mental health and psychosocial support to understand their rights. emotional distress, psychosocial problems and mental disorder. • Respect at all times the right of survivors to confidentiality and to informed In emergency situations, an intimate relationship exists between the promotion consent, including the right to refuse treatment. of mental health and psychosocial well-being and the protection and promotion of human rights. advocating for the implementation of human rights standards such as the rights to health, education or freedom from discrimination contributes to the creation of a protective environment and supports social protection see action sheet 3.2 and legal protection see action sheet 3.3. Promoting international human rights standards lays the ground for accountability and the introduction of measures • Protect survivors of human rights violations from the risk of stigmatisation by including them in broader programmes. 2. Implement mental health and psychosocial supports that promote and protect human rights. to end discrimination, ill treatment or violence. Taking steps to promote and protect • Make human rights an integral dimension of the design, implementation, monitoring human rights will reduce the risks to those affected by the emergency. at the same time, humanitarian assistance helps people to realise numerous and evaluation of mental health and psychosocial programmes in emergencies, especially for people judged to be at risk. Include human rights sensitisation in rights and can reduce human rights violations. Enabling at-risk groups, for example, psychosocial programmes. to access housing or water and sanitation increases their chances of being included in food distributions, improves their health and reduces their risks of discrimination and abuse. also, providing psychosocial support, including life skills and livelihoods support, to women and girls may reduce their risk of having to adopt survival strategies such as prostitution that expose them to additional risks of human rights violations. care must be taken, however, to avoid stigmatising vulnerable groups by targeting aid only at them. Because promoting human rights goes hand-in-hand with promoting mental • Work with stakeholders at different levels family, community, local and national NGOs and government to ensure that they understand their responsibilities. • Where appropriate, consider using discussions of human rights as a means of mobilising communities to assert their rights and to strengthen community social support see example on page 54. • analyse the impact of programmes on current or potential future human rights violations. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 52 Proofread by: Approved by: • consider, where appropriate, sharing information from these programmes with • Ending attacks on hospitals, schools and marketplaces; human rights organisations. This could include sharing voluntary and anonymous testimonies of survivors for advocacy purposes. It is essential to consider the risks for beneficiaries and for local and international staff, and to adhere to strict standards of privacy, data protection, confidentiality and informed consent. 3. Include a focus on human rights and protection in the training of all relevant workers. • Provide training to local and international humanitarian workers in all sectors and to health and social services staff working in pre-existing services, as well as to government officials, including police and military. • Make the fundamental rights of the affected population core components of staff training on codes of conduct see action sheet 4.2. • Promote the inclusion of the psychosocial impact of human rights violations on survivors in training for staff of human rights organisations and for government officials. Emphasise the need for appropriate interview techniques that respect survivors and consider the psychological impact of events. • advocate with human rights organisations on the need for psychosocial support for survivors and provide them with information on available support structures. 4. Establish – within the context of humanitarian and pre-existing services – mechanisms for the monitoring and reporting of abuse and exploitation. • Give particular attention to those people most at risk. • see action sheet 4.2 for guidance. 5. Advocate and provide specific advice to states on bringing relevant national legislation, policies and programmes into line with international standards and on enhancing compliance with these standards by government bodies institutions, police, army, etc.. advocacy should begin as soon as possible in the emergency and should take into account the need for measures to prevent violence and abuse and to ensure accountability for rights violations. Policies that favour the right to truth, justice and reparation should be promoted. Possible points for advocacy are: • Ending discrimination against minority groups; • Preventing child recruitment into armed forces or armed groups; • Releasing children from armed groups or illegal detention; • Preventing and responding to sexual violence including sexual exploitation and trafficking; • Facilitating humanitarian access for support and rehabilitation. consider how best to respond to non-compliance or to serious violations by raising the issue with the parties involved, at the international level or through the media, balancing the potential impact of any intervention with the risks for beneficiaries and for local and international staff. Key resources Relevant universal human rights instruments 1. A detailed overview of the universal human rights instruments, including the full texts and information on their status of ratification, can be found at: The website contains the: • UN International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 1966 • UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966 • General Comment 14 on the right to the highest attainable standard of health adopted by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in May 2000 E/C.12/2000/4, CESCR dated 4 July 2000 • UN Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and the Improvement of Mental Health Care 1991 • Geneva Conventions 1949 and the additional Protocols to the Conventions • Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1998 • UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989 and the Optional Protocols to the Convention 2000 • UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 • UN Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination 1965 • UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 1979 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention 1999.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  • adolescents agreed to use an adolescents’ forum to advocate for their rights with Palestinian decision-makers; to use the media to explain their situation, rights and views on what should be done; to work as trained volunteers in health facilities; to conduct recreational activities for younger children; and to establish a peer-to-peer support system. • By providing concrete options for youth to contribute to their community and to assert their rights, these programmes provided a sense of purpose, built solidarity and hope, and engaged adolescents as constructive, respected role models in the community. ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 54 Proofread by: Approved by: Guidelines and manuals 2. Amnesty International, International Human Rights Standards and Organisations, in Campaigning Manual, Chapter 6, www.amnesty.org/resources/pdf/campaigning-manual/chapter6.pdf. To access the full manual: 3. Health and Human Rights Info. 4. OCHA forthcoming. Developing a Humanitarian Advocacy Strategy and Action Plan: A Step-by-Step Manual. 5. Slim H. and Bonwick A. 2005. Protection: An ALNAP Guide for Humanitarian Agencies. 6. Tearfund. Setting the Standard: A common approach for child protection in NGOs. 7. UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement 1998. 8. UNICEF and the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers 2003. Guide to the Optional Protocol on Children in Armed Conflict. 9. UNICEF. A Principled Approach to Humanitarian Action, e-learning course. www.unicef.org/path Sample process indicators • Mental health and psychosocial programmes comply with international human rights standards and are designed with a view to protecting the population against violence, abuse and exploitation. • Training for staff of psychosocial and mental health programmes contains a focus on human rights. • appropriate mechanisms for the monitoring and reporting of instances of abuse and exploitation of civilians are established. example: occupied Palestinian territory, 2000 • a UN agency supported workshops where adolescents discussed their roles in the community, against a background of ongoing conflict that was undermining their rights to education, health, participation and protection from violence, among other rights. • Many adolescents felt hopeless and some thought that violence was the only option, while others argued for non-violent ways to protect their rights.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 56 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 3.2 Identify, monitor, prevent and respond to protection threats and failures through social protection Function: Protection and human rights standards Phase: Minimum Response background themselves to address protection threats, thereby building a sense of empowerment and the possibility of sustainable mechanisms for protection. complementing this non- specialist work is work conducted by protection specialists. For example, experienced child protection workers should address the special vulnerabilities of children, and specialised protection workers are also needed to build local capacities for protection. In emergencies, a complex interplay occurs between protection threats and mental This action sheet is aimed at both non-specialists and specialists. health and psychosocial well-being. survivors often report that their greatest stress arises from threats such as attack and persecution, forced displacement, gender-based violence, separation from or abduction of family members, extreme poverty and exploitation and ill treatment. such protection problems produce immediate suffering and may interfere with the rebuilding of social networks and a sense of community, both of which support psychosocial well-being. Emergencies may also exacerbate differences in power within the affected population, increasing the vulnerability of already marginalised people. Without attention to protection issues, MHPss can become focused on consequences while ignoring underlying and ongoing causes. Promoting a protective environment, then, is an integral part of psychosocial support. Psychosocial and Key actions 1. Learn from specialised protection assessments whether, when and how to collect information on protection threats. Many protection assessment activities should be carried out by protection specialists who have technical expertise and who understand the local context. Non-specialists should avoid conducting assessments on sensitive issues such as rape, torture or detention. However, there is a role for non-specialist work. For example, educators must learn about protection risks to children and how to make education safe. To succeed, non-specialist work must build upon the work of protection specialists by: mental health issues can also contribute to protection threats. For example, children • Learning what protection threats have been identified; who have lost their families and who are extremely distressed face increased risks of living on the streets, being exploited or, in some emergencies, joining armed groups. In addition, people with severe mental disabilities may wander, exposing themselves to hazards that most other people can avoid. Protection requires both legal and social mechanisms. Legal protection entails applying international human rights instruments see action sheet 3.1, and • Talking with protection specialists before initiating social protection activities; • Learning what channels exist for reporting protection issues; • assessing any dangers for interviewers, interviewees, aid workers, the local population related to asking questions. ask trusted key informants from different sub-groups or factions: international and national laws see action sheet 3.3. social protection, the focus of • What is permissible to ask safely? this action sheet, occurs largely through activating and strengthening social networks and community mechanisms that reduce risks and meet immediate needs. Protection is a collective responsibility of states, affected populations and the humanitarian community see code of conduct for the international Red cross and Red crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief. Humanitarian workers, whether they are from the affected population or outside agencies or both, can contribute to protection in numerous ways. an essential step is to deliver aid in various key sectors see action sheets 9.1, 10.1 and 11.1 in • When and where is it safe to ask questions? • How to avoid causing harm. Before interviewing torture survivors, ask whether doing so will endanger other members of their families; who could conduct interviews safely; where and when to conduct interviews; and what the risks are of post-interview retaliation against survivors. a way that supports vulnerable people, restores dignity and helps to rebuild social 2. Conduct a multi-sectoral participatory assessment of protection threats networks. Much of the most effective social protection occurs as local people organise and capacities.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 58 Proofread by: Approved by: • conduct a situation analysis of protection concerns: • collect age- and gender-disaggregated data whenever possible. • see action sheet 2.1 for guidance on conducting assessments in an ethical • Establish protocols/guidance relating to informed consent and to the and appropriately participatory manner. documentation, storage and sharing of confidential information. • Include in the team members of the affected group who are trained and • alert all sectoral and intersectoral assessment teams and coordination mechanisms supported, provided they are viewed as impartial and it is safe for all involved. to identified protection concerns. • Determine whether it is acceptable to discuss sensitive protection issues either with people individually or in group settings. 3. Activate or establish social protection mechanisms, building local protection • Identify in a range of settings e.g. camps, routes followed by people collecting capacities where needed. water or firewood, non-formal education sites, markets protection threats such as gender-based violence GBV, attacks on civilians, forced displacement, abduction, recruitment of minors, trafficking, exploitation, hazardous labour, landmines, exposure to HIV/aIDs and neglect of people in institutions. However, avoid using a checklist approach, which may ‘blind’ assessors to other or emerging protection threats. • Taking care to avoid causing harm, ask questions such as: • What factors cause the violence and who are the perpetrators? • as appropriate in the context, mobilise people who have or who previously had a role in organising community-level care or protection, ensuring that women and other key at-risk groups are represented. • Raise local awareness about how to report protection violations. • Establish, where feasible, a protection working group PWG that builds on existing initiatives whenever possible, incorporates diverse actors including human rights organisations and serves as a coordination body regarding protection for humanitarian actors. PWGs help to monitor and respond to protection issues and • are the perpetrators still present and are they intimidating local people or may be set up for villages, camps or wider geographic areas. They should have those who would offer protection? defined roles, such as filling protection gaps and sharing best practices. • Has family separation occurred? Is it still happening? • Organise training by protection specialists to build the capacity of the PWG if • Where are separated or unaccompanied children? • What has happened to elderly/disabled people? • What has happened to those living in institutions and hospitals? • What are the current safety/security concerns? • analyse local capacities for protection, asking questions such as: • In the past, how did groups in the community handle protection threats such as those present now, and what are people doing at present? • How has the crisis affected protection systems and coping mechanisms that were previously active? • Where are those who would normally provide protection? • are some of the presumed protective resources – such as police, soldiers or peacekeepers, or schools – creating protection threats? necessary, including material on the risks faced by people with mental disabilities. • Wherever possible, link the PWG with other protection mechanisms in neighbouring areas, forming regional protection networks that exchange information on threats. • Provide access to education as a protection measure see action sheet 7.1, ensuring that education personnel understand how to make education safe. 4. Monitor protection threats, sharing information with relevant agencies and protection stakeholders. • Track protection threats and changes in their nature, intensity, pattern and focus at different venues such as schools and marketplaces. • Via the PWGs and organisations active on protection issues, regularly share information with protection stakeholders, creating wherever possible a central database accessible by different agencies and offering data disaggregated by age  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 60 Proofread by: Approved by: and gender. • Organise support for survivors of abuse who are in severe psychological distress • Establish places for information exchange see action sheet 8.1 relevant to see action sheets 5.2 and 6.1. protection threats and security issues through which members of the affected • avoid singling out or targeting specific sub-groups for assistance, unless this is population and agency workers can provide information, thereby reducing the critical to prevent further harm. Integrated support helps to reduce discrimination spread of rumours. • Protect confidentiality and share information, following guidelines established by the PWG. and may build social connectedness. consider, for example, providing women’s groups rather than groups for women who have been raped. • Integrate protection into all sectors of humanitarian assistance, including: • Post-distribution monitoring of food aid to ensure that it reaches children 5. Respond to protection threats by taking appropriate, community-guided action. and others in need; • Ensure that interventions are based on consultation with and, whenever possible, participation of affected communities. • Learn from and build on community-level successes in responding to threats and, where appropriate, disseminate the strategies that the community or a relevant • Monitoring shelter programmes to ensure that those who may need special assistance receive support in obtaining adequate shelter; • Ensuring that sanitation facilities are close to people’s living quarters, and that they are well lit and safe for women and children; segment of the community has developed to protect itself. • Developing an intersectoral strategy regarding GBV, where appropriate. • Organise appropriate social protection responses, such as: • Organising safe spaces see action sheet 5.1 where children can play and 6. Prevent protection threats through a combination of programming and advocacy. adults can meet to discuss steps to increase protection and well-being; • Enforce codes of conduct for humanitarian workers that protect children and • Establishing systems for the identification, documentation, tracing, prevent sexual exploitation and abuse see action sheet 4.2. reunification and temporary care arrangements of separated children see inter-agency Guiding Principles on Unaccompanied and separated children in the Key resources below; • Providing emergency support at safe spaces, centres or designated areas for extremely vulnerable individuals/families; • activating local processes of dispute resolution; • activating local processes for helping people at greatest risk see action sheet 5.2; • Providing small grants, where appropriate, to alleviate economic threats to well-being; • Develop an advocacy strategy in collaboration with local people and relevant coordination groups, addressing key issues such as: • Measures to protect the physical safety and security of local people; • The need for flexible, long-term funding to respond to complex, changing threats; • appropriate care arrangements for children placed in orphanages and institutions. • Establish procedures concerning media access to at-risk people, recognising that media attention can lead to a reprisal attacks against former child soldiers or rape survivors; b distress related to violations of confidentiality, multiple interviews or • supporting local action to decrease the risks posed by landmines, use of inappropriate questions; and c stigma on account of being singled out. unexploded ordnance and uncovered wells; • Provide information in ways that people can understand, enabling them to make • Preventing external groups from taking away orphans, young single women or informed decisions about key protection issues see action sheet 8.1. other individuals at risk. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 62 Proofread by: Approved by: Key resources 1. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP 2005. Protection: An ALNAP Guide for Humanitarian Agencies. 2. IASC 2002. Growing the Sheltering Tree: Protecting Rights Through Humanitarian Action. 3. IASC 2005. Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings. Geneva: IASC. example: Sierra leone, 2002 • Following a decade of internal war, girls who had been abducted and sexually exploited by armed groups often experienced stigmatisation, harassment and attack on their return to villages. • an international NGO organised community dialogues to help local people understand that the girls had been forced to do bad things and had themselves suffered extensively during the war. 4. IASC 2006. Protecting Persons Affected By Natural Disasters: IASC Operational Guidelines on Human • Local villages organised Girls’ Well-Being committees that defined and imposed Rights and Natural Disasters. fines for harassment and mistreatment of the girls. perational%20Guidelines%20final.pdf • This community protection mechanism sharply reduced abuses of the girls and 5. ICRC, IRC, Save the Children UK, UNICEF, UNHCR and World Vision 2004. Inter-Agency Guiding supported their reintegration into civilian life. Principles on Unaccompanied and Separated Children. Save the Children UK. 6. IFRC and ICRC 1994. The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and Non-Governmental Organizations NGOs in Disaster Relief. 7. InterAction 2004. Making Protection a Priority: Integrating Protection and Humanitarian Assistance. 8. OCHA forthcoming. Developing a Humanitarian Advocacy Strategy and Action Plan: A Step-by-Step Manual. 9. UNHCR. Operational Protection in Camps and Settlements: A reference guide of good practices in the protection of refugees and other persons of concern. 10. UNICEF. Ethical Guidelines for Journalists. www.unicef.org/ceecis/media1482.html Sample process indicators • Humanitarian workers know they are responsible for reporting violations and know how to report violations. • In camps, villages or settlement areas, there is a local protection group or mechanism that engages in protection monitoring, reporting and action. • steps are taken to protect the most vulnerable people, including those with chronic mental disabilities.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 64 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 3.3 Identify, monitor, prevent and respond to protection threats and abuses through legal protection Function: Protection and human rights standards Phase: Minimum Response background The breakdown in law and order that occurs in many emergencies increases people’s vulnerability to violations of the rights and safeguards afforded by international and national legal systems. In armed conflict, where human rights violations are often widespread and committed with impunity, people may be too afraid to report crimes or may experience retaliation if they do. These conditions rob people of their dignity and respect, as well as their sense of control over their lives and environment. Legal protection is therefore essential in promoting mental health and psychosocial well-being. Legal protection refers to the application of international humanitarian and human rights laws, which delineate the rights to which all people are entitled, with regional and international levels. In this partnership approach, many different actors play vital roles. While much legal protection work is the work of specialists, all people involved in humanitarian aid have a responsibility to support appropriate legal protection. Key actions 1. Identify the main protection threats and the status of existing protection mechanisms, especially for people at heightened risk. • conduct participatory assessments see action sheet 2.1 with people at increased risk see chapter 1 to identify: the main protection risks; people’s skills and capacity to prevent and respond to the risks; whether local protection mechanisms are available and how well or how poorly they protect different groups; and what additional support should be provided see also action sheet 3.2. special protection measures for at-risk groups see chapter 1. Under international • consider the potential harm of such assessments to the population, analysing the law, states bear the primary responsibility for protecting people on their territories. potential risks and benefits. as such, national statutory and customary laws should be used as the basis for legal protection, when they are consistent with international legal standards. When protection under national law is weak or is not feasible, efforts should be made to provide legal protection in accordance with established international standards, recognising that these are the minimum applicable standards to which the international community should adhere in an emergency. Legal protection activities 2. Increase affected people’s awareness of their legal rights and their ability to assert these rights in the safest possible way, using culturally appropriate communication methods see Action Sheet 8.1. actions may include: must begin at the earliest stages of an emergency, and those involved must understand • Working with community leaders and relevant local authorities such as lawyers, the sensitivity that such work may require and the need to weigh carefully the relative camp leaders, police, etc. to mobilise and educate members of their community risks and benefits. about legal rights and how to achieve these rights in a safe manner. Priority issues safety, dignity and integrity are fundamental concepts to both international may include rights of access to humanitarian aid, special protection for at-risk humanitarian/human rights law and to a psychosocial approach to humanitarian groups, mechanisms for reporting and their potential risks, etc. actions may action. Legal protection promotes mental health and psychosocial well-being by include: shielding people from harm, promoting a sense of dignity, self-worth and safety, and strengthening social responsibility and accountability for actions. However, legal protection efforts may cause harm when they ignore psychosocial considerations. For instance, survivors of crimes such as torture or rape often feel blamed or stigmatised as a result of legal proceedings. It is important to implement legal protection in a way that promotes psychosocial well-being. To achieve legal protection, there needs to be collaboration at local, national, • Organising group dialogues in socially acceptable ways i.e. considering age and gender roles, and appropriate communication tools to discuss rights. • Providing age- and gender-appropriate information in public places such as food distribution sites, health clinics, schools, etc. • Facilitating the use of legal mechanisms to ensure access to humanitarian services and goods, ensuring that there are systems in place for lodging complaints about violations of rights to free and safe access to services and goods.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 66 Proofread by: Approved by: 3. Support mechanisms for monitoring, reporting and acting on violations • assisting survivors who choose to report violations, and who are seeking protection of legal standards. or redress, to fully understand the implications of their actions, so that they are • Identify when and how it is appropriate to report violations. Recognise that in some carried out with informed consent; situations, official mechanisms such as police are appropriate venues for reporting, • avoiding causing marginalisation by drawing attention to particular survivors, whereas in other situations reporting to police can create risk of harm. especially when their experiences are likely to attract social stigma; • Humanitarian actors should report denials of rights, such as access to humanitarian • Identifying and supporting mechanisms that end impunity and hold perpetrators assistance, to the appropriate body such as Human Rights commissions or the accountable for their acts. This includes recognising that punitive justice does not Protection cluster and seek its assistance in identifying possible actions. always allow for community-level healing or support community-based restorative • Information sharing must respect confidentiality and minimise risks of retribution or stigmatisation. • Utilising national and/or international mechanisms for example, security council Resolution 1612 regarding children affected by armed conflict may be appropriate. 4. Advocate for compliance with international law, and with national and customary laws consistent with international standards. actions might include: justice systems that are consistent with international legal standards and that will lead to forgiveness and reconciliation e.g. safe release of child and other vulnerable combatants, tracing and reunification, and promoting initial steps in the reintegration process; • Orienting those working within the legal system – e.g. lawyers, judges, paralegals and court advocates – on how their work affects psychosocial well-being. Key topics may include: • The potential positive and negative impacts on psychosocial well-being that judicial proceedings may have on survivors, emphasising approaches that • Identifying and disseminating information on the national and international legal promote safety, dignity and integrity; frameworks see action sheet 4.2 that protect people at risk; • Participating in or supporting public education campaigns to end specific abuses such as illegal detentions, refoulement, gender-based violence or recruitment of children; • Orienting national and local legal structures to provide adequate legal protection through capacity-building efforts with, for example, police, judicial and military personnel; • conducting legal advocacy against commonly known inappropriate responses in emergencies that can degrade the social fabric of affected populations, such as adoption in emergencies, institutionalisation of vulnerable persons and trafficking of children and women. • sensitive and appropriate techniques for interviewing witnesses and survivors, taking into consideration age, gender and the psychosocial impact of their experiences; • The importance of confidentiality in protecting the safety and well-being of survivors i.e. information storage and management, closed courtroom sessions, etc.; • The significance of key legal protection issues in relation to the psychosocial well-being of different groups. Topics may include: • Legal processes to determine the fate of disappeared persons, which are particularly important for grieving processes; • Ensuring that customary law processes of accountability are followed, as these may be essential to communities’ acceptance of children recruited 5. Implement legal protection in a manner that promotes psychosocial well-being, by armed forces; dignity and respect. Important steps include: • How inheritance and land rights provide essential economic support for widows and children, encouraging self-reliance and resilience;  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 68 Proofread by: Approved by: • Diversion of people with severe mental disorders from the legal system to appropriate social and health services. Key resources Guidelines and manuals • conducting advocacy in a way that respects confidentiality, dignity and integrity, 1. ActionAid 2001. Learning About Rights – Module three: law and rights in emergencies. and which avoids further distress. Public display of survivors’ faces, even to communicate information about humanitarian efforts, can be degrading. avoid 2. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP images that display overwhelming and obvious suffering, or which reinforce 2005. Protection: An ALNAP Guide for Humanitarian Emergencies. survivors’ sense of victimisation see action sheet 8.1. www.odi.org.uk/alnap/publications/protection/index.htm 6. Provide psychosocial support and legal protection services in a complementary fashion. Useful steps are to: • Identify appropriate psychosocial supports for witnesses and people who wish to report violations or seek legal redress. • Orient social support workers on how to assist survivors through the judicial and accompanying processes i.e. medical examinations, exhumations, identification of dead, etc.. • Establish support groups and child care options for witnesses, defendants and others involved in legal processes. • Identify how to make referrals to specialised mental health and psychosocial supports and services, if needed. 3. IRIN 2006. Justice for a Lawless World: Rights and Reconciliation in a New Era of International Law Parts I and II. 4. Keeping Children Safe 2006. ‘Setting the international standards for child protection’. 5. UNICEF 2003. Technical Notes: Special Considerations for Programming in Unstable Situations. human rights monitoring and action groups Amnesty International Human Rights Watch Inter-American Commission on Human Rights • Recognise the need for legal protection referral for persons encountered in Key international legal instruments psychosocial and mental health services. For example, survivors of sexual violence often receive medical and psychosocial support, but may continue to be or feel in danger and be unable to fully heal if they know that the perpetrator will not be punished. For a list of key international legal instruments, see Action Sheet 3.1. Sample process indicators • Include essential information on legal protection in orientations and training on mental health and psychosocial support see action sheet 4.1, helping workers to • Key legal protection gaps are identified and action plans are developed to address these appropriately. understand what to do, or not to do, when they encounter people who need legal • Psychosocial, mental health and orientations/trainings for legal protection workers protection, including appropriate referrals. include information on legal protection and psychosocial well-being, and on the link between the two. • survivors of human rights abuses receive complementary support from legal protection workers and from people skilled in providing mental health and psychosocial support.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 70 Proofread by: Approved by: example: democratic Republic of Congo • In North and south Kivu Province, sexual violence remains widespread and survivors are often rejected by their families and communities. action sheet 4.1 Identify and recruit staff and engage volunteers who understand local culture Function: Human resources Phase: Minimum Response • International and local NGOs that offer psychosocial assistance to survivors background work closely with human rights organisations, sharing data on types and numbers International staff and volunteers may come from different geographic, economic and of cases and sensitising communities about the psychosocial impact of sexual violence, women’s rights and the need for accountability in instances of rape. • survivors and communities are encouraged to report cases in ways that are safe and appropriate, with psychosocial workers ensuring that confidentiality and informed consent are respected and that questioning occurs in a supportive manner. • Nationally, agencies advocate together for changing the law on sexual violence to better protect survivors. cultural backgrounds than the affected population in the host country and may have different views and values. Nevertheless, they should have the capacity to respect local cultures and values and to adapt their skills to suit local conditions. The distress of the affected population may be worsened by an influx of humanitarian workers if the latter are not technically competent or if they are unable to handle the predictable stresses of emergency aid work. Local staff and volunteers may be well acquainted with local cultures and traditions, but there can still be large socio-cultural differences, for example between urban and rural populations and between ethnic groups. People in aid’s code of Good Practice in the Management and support of aid Personnel provides overall guiding principles for the management and support of staff working in humanitarian and development agencies. as described in the code of Good Practice, the objective of recruitment is to get the right people staff and volunteers to the right place at the right time. In most emergencies this is an enormous challenge, and competition for local staff is common. The key actions described below give specific guidance relevant to recruiting workers to protect and support the mental health and well-being of emergency-affected populations in crisis situations. Key actions 1. Designate knowledgeable and accountable personnel to undertake recruitment. such personnel should: • Be trained in human resource management according to the People in aid code of Good Practice; • Be knowledgeable about the predictable stresses of humanitarian aid work and the policies and practices needed to mitigate them see action sheet 4.4; • Understand minimum health and mental health requirements for high-risk and high-stress assignments based on the organisation’s own experience and that of similar agencies; 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 72 Proofread by: Approved by: • Depending on context, be aware of potential conflict based on ethnic, racial or 5. Check references and professional qualifications when recruiting national and national identity. international staff, including short-term consultants, translators, interns and 2. Apply recruitment and selection principles. The selection process must be fair, • contact referees to identify/check: volunteers. transparent and consistent to ensure that the most appropriate and capable personnel are appointed. • Follow written recruitment procedures that outline in detail how staff and volunteers are recruited and selected. • aim to attract the widest pool possible of suitably qualified candidates. • Reduce ‘brain drain’ from local to international organisations. International agencies should a collaborate with local agencies to carry out essential relief tasks, reducing the need to hire large numbers of staff from international organisations and b avoid offering exceptionally high wages that draw local staff away from organisations already working in the area. • Maintain appropriate documentation and inform candidates whether or not they have been selected. Feedback should be given to candidates if requested. 3. Balance gender in the recruitment process and include representatives of key cultural and ethnic groups. Mental health and psychosocial support programmes require community input and participation. Women and men in the community often • The candidate’s strengths and weaknesses; • The candidate’s ability to tolerate high-stress situations; • Whether the candidate has presented himself or herself honestly; • The candidate’s ability to adapt to and respect local culture; • That the candidate has no record whatsoever of child abuse especially relevant when recruiting for work that involves contact with children. • When hiring professionals, check formal qualifications proof of completion of professional training, membership of a professional organisation, as appropriate. • If time allows, check for criminal records. consider the following: • In situations of political repression, people may have a record of having been arrested without having committed any crime. • Do not hire persons who have a history of perpetrating any type of violence. a deliberate exception may be made in the case of former soldiers, with the aim of promoting their reintegration into society. have different needs. To assess these differences, men and women typically need to be 6. Aim to hire staff who have knowledge of, and insight into, the local culture and interviewed separately by male and female workers. This enables gender-specific and appropriate modes of behaviour. clinical or any other interpersonal psychosocial personal issues to be discussed more openly. similarly, recruiting representatives from support tasks should be performed mainly by local staff who speak the local language key cultural and ethnic groups facilitates inputs from, and the participation of, those and who have a thorough understanding of social and cultural responses to the groups. emergency situation. 4. Establish terms and conditions for volunteer work. Organisations that work with 7. Carefully evaluate offers of help from individual non-affiliated foreign mental volunteers to deliver psychosocial support should make clear their expectations of health professionals. Well-intending foreign mental health professionals who are not volunteers’ roles. similarly, they should make clear policies on reimbursement, affiliated to any organisation should be discouraged from travelling to disaster- entitlements, training, supervision and management of/support for volunteers. affected regions unless they meet the following criteria: Where possible, volunteers should be recruited and supported by organisations that have experience in managing volunteers. • They have previously worked in emergency settings. • They have previously worked outside their own socio-cultural setting.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 74 Proofread by: Approved by: • They have basic competence in some of the interventions covered in these guidelines. • agencies decline help offered by foreign mental health professionals who do not • They have an understanding of either community psychology or public health meet the key criteria outlined above. principles. • They have a written invitation from a national or established international organisation to work in the country. • They are invited to work as part of an organisation that is likely to maintain a sustained community presence in the emergency area. • They do not focus their work on implementing interventions themselves e.g. clinical work, but rather provide support to programmes on a general level, including the • clinical or other interpersonal psychosocial support tasks are provided primarily by national staff who are familiar with the local culture. example: Sri lanka, 2005 • after the December 2004 tsunami, national Red cross and Red crescent societies from numerous countries worked with the sri Lankan Red cross society, making extensive use of local volunteers. transfer of skills to local staff, so that interventions and supports are implemented • The national Red cross/Red crescent societies collaborated to develop a common psychosocial support framework for the sri Lankan Red cross society. • all relevant staff and volunteers engaged by the movement were trained according to similar principles, including training in working with cultural resources to provide community support. Because resources were invested in hiring and training staff and volunteers, there is now an enhanced understanding in the country of the positive effects of community-based psychosocial work. by local staff. Key resources 1. Antares Foundation 2005. Managing Stress in Humanitarian Workers: Guidelines for Good Practice. Workers%20-%20Guidelines%20for%20Good%20Practice.pdf 2. IASC 2005. Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings, Action Sheet 4.1: Recruit staff in a manner that will discourage sexual exploitation and abuse, pp.50-52. Geneva: IASC. GBVGuidelines2005.pdf. 3. IFRC 1999. Volunteering Policy: Implementation Guide. Geneva: IFRC. 4. Oxfam 2004. Recruitment in Humanitarian Work. 5. People in Aid 2003. Code of Good Practice in the Management and Support of Aid Personnel. Sample process indicators • Organisations apply a written human resource policy that specifies steps relating to recruitment procedures and terms of employment. • Organisations achieve balanced recruitment in terms of men/women and minority groups.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 76 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 4.2 Enforce staff codes of conduct and ethical guidelines Function: Human resources Phase: Minimum Response background youth is an essential minimum first step in any assessment, monitoring or research. The existence of a code of conduct or agreed ethical standards does not in itself prevent abuse or exploitation. accountability requires that all staff and communities are informed of the standards and that they understand their relevance and application. There must be an organisational culture that supports and protects During emergencies, large numbers of people rely on humanitarian actors to meet ‘whistle-blowers’ and complaints mechanisms that are accessible and trusted through basic needs. This reliance, together with disrupted or destroyed protection systems which people, including those who are most isolated and/or most vulnerable and e.g. family networks, contributes to inherently unequal power relationships between thus often most at risk of abuse, can report concerns confidentially. those delivering services and those receiving them. accordingly, the potential for abuse There need to be investigation procedures in place and staff who have been or exploitation of the affected population is high; at the same time, the opportunities trained to investigate in a sensitive but rigorous manner. systems also need to be in for detection and reporting of such abuse tend to diminish. The potential for place that advise when legal action is safe and appropriate and that support humanitarian actors to cause harm, either by abusing positions of power or as an individuals who take legal action against alleged perpetrators. Throughout, systems unintended consequence of an intervention, must be explicitly recognised, considered need to take into account the safety and protection needs of everyone concerned in and addressed by all humanitarian agencies. such incidents: victims, complainants, witnesses, investigators and the subjects To reduce harm, humanitarian workers should adhere to agreed standards for of the complaint, the alleged perpetrators. staff conduct, particularly the secretary-General’s Bulletin on special Measures for Protection from sexual Exploitation and sexual abuse. This bulletin applies to all UN staff, including separately administered organs and programmes, to peacekeeping personnel and to personnel of all organisations entering into cooperative arrangements with the UN. Donors increasingly require aid organisations to enforce these measures. In addition, the code of conduct for the international Red cross and Red crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief outlines the approaches and standards of behaviour that promote the independence, effectiveness and impact to which humanitarian NGOs and the International Red cross and Red crescent Movement aspire. as of 2007, this code of conduct had been agreed by 405 organisations. Wider issues of ethical standards that guide the behaviour expected of workers need to be agreed, made explicit and enforced, sector by sector. In all interventions, the potential for causing harm as an unintended, but nonetheless real, consequence must be considered and weighed from the outset. a critical example is the collection of data, which is essential for the design and development of effective services but which also requires the careful weighing of benefits and risks to individuals and communities. consideration of how not to raise expectations, how to minimise harm, how to obtain Key actions 1. Establish within each organisation a code of conduct that embodies widely accepted standards of conduct for humanitarian workers. 2. Inform and regularly remind all humanitarian workers, both current and newly recruited workers, about the agreed minimum required standards of behaviour, based on explicit codes of conduct and ethical guidelines. This applies to all workers, international and national staff, volunteers and consultants, and to those recruited from the affected population. Informing workers of their responsibilities should not be done solely in writing but also through person-to-person dialogue that ensures understanding and allows workers to ask questions. 3. Establish an agreed inter-agency mechanism e.g. Focal Point Network proposed by the United Nations Secretary-General to ensure compliance beyond simply having a code of conduct. This mechanism should: • share information and lessons learned, to improve the functioning of individual informed consent, how to handle and store confidential data and how to provide systems; additional safeguards when working with at-risk populations such as children and • Jointly disseminate information about codes of conduct to communities;  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 78 Proofread by: Approved by: • coordinate other activities, including staff training, monitoring mechanisms, 10. Maintain written records of workers who have been found to have violated investigation procedures, etc. to prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and codes of conduct, to increase the effectiveness of subsequent referral/recruitment abuse; checks. • Establish systems that respond appropriately when an allegation of misconduct concerns staff from a number of different organisations, or where the individual Key resources and/or organisation cannot be identified immediately. 1. Horizons, Population Council, Impact, Family Health International 2005. Ethical Approaches to Gathering Information from Children and Adolescents in International Settings. 4. Establish accessible, safe and trusted complaints mechanisms that: www.popcouncil.org/pdfs/horizons/childrenethics.pdf • Demonstrate commitment to confidentiality; • are age-, gender-, and culture-sensitive; • Take into account the safety and well-being of the survivor as the paramount consideration; • Refer the victim/survivor to appropriate, confidential services, including medical and legal services and psychosocial supports; • Preserve the complainant’s confidentiality. 5. Inform communities about the standards and ethical guidelines, and of how and to whom they can raise concerns confidentially. 6. Ensure that all staff understand that they must report all concerns as soon as they are raised. Their obligation is to report possible violations, not to investigate the allegation. 7. Use investigation protocols that comply with an agreed standard, such as the IASC Model Complaints and Investigations Procedures see Key resources. 8. Take appropriate disciplinary action against staff for confirmed violations of the code of conduct or ethical guidelines. 2. IASC 2004. Model Complaints Referral Form Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. 3. IASC 2004. Model Information Sheet for Communities. 4. IASC 2004. Terms of Reference for In-Country Focal Points on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. 5. IASC 2004. Terms of Reference for In-Country Networks on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. 6. International Council of Voluntary Agencies forthcoming. Building Safer Organisations. Geneva: ICVA. 7. IFRC, Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief. www.IFRC.org/PUBLICAT/conduct/code.asp 8. Keeping Children Safe 2006. ‘Setting the international standards for child protection’. 9. United Nations 2003. Secretary-General’s Bulletin: Special Measures for Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse ST/SGB/2003/13. 10. United Nations 2004. Special Measures for Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse: Report of the Secretary-General A/58/777. Sample process indicators 9. Establish an agreed response in cases in which the alleged behaviour constitutes a criminal act in either the host country or the home country of the alleged • Each organisation has systems in place to inform all staff of the minimum standards of behaviour expected. perpetrator. as a minimum, this requires that no administrative action is taken that • communities being served by humanitarian actors are informed about the standards jeopardises legal proceedings, other than those instances in which fair or humane and about ways in which they can safely raise concerns about possible violations. proceedings are very unlikely.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 80 Proofread by: Approved by: • agencies have staff trained and available to undertake investigations of alleged violations, within a reasonable timeframe. action sheet 4.3 Organise orientation and training of aid workers in mental health and psychosocial support Function: Human resources Phase: Minimum Response example: Kenya, 2003 • agencies working in Kakuma agreed to a common code of conduct that applied background to all workers. • communities received information about the standards through a range of channels, including video. • Inter-agency training was conducted on how to investigate allegations of misconduct. National and international aid workers play a key role in the provision of mental health and psychosocial support MHPss in emergencies. To be prepared to do so requires that all workers have the necessary knowledge and skills. Training should prepare workers to provide those emergency responses identified as priorities in needs assessments see action sheets 1.1 and 2.1. Though training content will have some similarities across emergencies, it must be modified for the culture, context, needs and capacities of each situation, and cannot be transferred automatically from one emergency to another. Decisions about who participates in training and about the mode, content and methodology of learning vary according to the conditions of the emergency and the capacities of the workers. Inadequately oriented and trained workers without the appropriate attitudes and motivation can be harmful to populations they seek to assist. Essential teaching may be organised through brief orientation and training seminars followed by ongoing support and supervision. seminars should accentuate practical instruction and focus on the essential skills, knowledge, ethics and guidelines needed for emergency response. seminars should be participatory, should be adapted to the local culture and context and should utilise learning models in which participants are both learners and educators. Key actions 1. Prepare a strategic, comprehensive, timely and realistic plan for training. all partner organisations involved in MHPss must have such plans. Plans must be coordinated and integrated between partners and should follow the guidelines established in the overall rapid assessments of problems and resources see action sheets 1.1 and 2.1. 2. Select competent, motivated trainers. Local trainers or co-trainers with prior experience and/or knowledge of the affected location are preferred when they have the necessary knowledge and skills. Important selection criteria for trainers include: 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 82 Proofread by: Approved by: • cultural sensitivity and basic knowledge about local cultural attitudes and practices seminars should preferably be organised before workers begin their missions. and systems of social support; • Emotional stability; • Good knowledge about MHPss emergency response, including understanding the value of integrated and collaborative responses; • Practical field-based experience in providing psychosocial support in previous emergencies; • Good knowledge of teaching, leading to immediate and practical MHPss interventions. 3. Utilise learning methodologies that facilitate the immediate and practical application of learning. • Use a participatory teaching style e.g. role play, dialogue, drama, group problem solving, etc. that engages active trainee participation. • Utilise learning models in which participants are both learners and educators. • Train participants in local languages or, when this is not possible, provide translation. • Use audio/visual/reference materials adapted to local conditions e.g. avoid PowerPoint presentations if electricity is unavailable. • Use classrooms for theoretical learning and initial practice of skills e.g. role plays, among other techniques. Possible participants include all aid workers in all sectors particularly from social services, health, education, protection and emergency response divisions. This includes paid and unpaid, national and international workers from humanitarian organisations and from government. Depending on the situation, orientation seminars can also include elected or volunteer male, female and youth community leaders, including clan, religious, tribal and ethnic group leaders. Training seminars. More extensive knowledge and skills are recommended for those working on focused and specialised MHPss see top two layers of the pyramid in Figure 1, chapter 1. • The length and content of training seminars vary according to trainees’ needs and capacities. Inexperienced staff will require longer periods of training. • The timing of seminars must not interfere with the provision of emergency response. • The use of short, consecutive modules for cumulative learning is recommended, because a this limits the need to remove staff from their duties for extended periods and b it allows staff to practise skills between training sessions. Each short module lasts only a few hours or days according to the situation and is followed by practice in the field with support and supervision, before the next new module is introduced in a few days’ or weeks’ time. • Training seminars should always be followed up with field-based support and/or supervision see key action 7 below. • Use hands-on field-based training to practise skills in locations that are in or 5. Prepare orientation and training seminar content directly related to the expected resemble the emergency-affected area. emergency response. • Distribute written reference materials in accessible language, including manuals The contents of brief orientation seminars may include: with specific operational guidelines if available. • Review of safety and security procedures; • complete immediate evaluations of training by trainers, trainees and assisted • Methods for workers to cope with work-related problems see action sheet 4.4; populations to benefit from lessons learned. 4. Match trainees’ learning needs with appropriate modes of learning. Brief orientation seminars half or full-day seminars should provide immediate basic, essential, functional knowledge and skills relating to psychosocial needs, problems and available resources to everyone working at each level of response. Orientation • codes of conduct and other ethical considerations see action sheet 4.2; • Human rights and rights-based approaches to humanitarian assistance see the sphere Project’s Humanitarian charter and action sheet 3.1; • Importance of empowerment and of involving the local population in relief activities see action sheet 5.1;  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 84 Proofread by: Approved by: • Basic knowledge on the impact of emergencies on mental health and psychosocial • Teachers see action sheet 7.1. well-being of populations see chapter 1; • Techniques for psychological first aid see action sheet 6.1; 6. Consider establishing Training of Trainers ToT programmes to prepare • Methods to promote the dignity of the affected population, using lessons learned trainers prior to training. from previous emergencies; • Knowledge about local socio-cultural and historical context, including: • Basic knowledge about the crisis and the world views of the affected populations; • Basic information about cultural attitudes, practices and systems of social organisation, as well as both effective and detrimental traditional practices, rituals and coping strategies; ToT programmes educate future trainers so that they can competently train others. Trainers of brief orientation and training seminars can be prepared via a ToT. skilful ToT programmes can also prepare trainers to transfer information to large groups of people. However, ToT must only be done with careful planning and be taught by experienced and skilled master trainers. Poorly prepared ToTs – in particular those that involve a future trainers without any previous experience in training or b future trainers with limited experience in the training content – tend to fail and may lead to poor or even harmful MHPss outcomes. Thus, after a ToT, follow-up support • Basic information on workers’ behaviours that might be offensive to the should be provided to the future trainers and to their trainees, to achieve accuracy of local culture; training and quality of the aid response. • Information about available sources of referral e.g. tracing, health and protection services, traditional community supports, legal services, etc.; • Information on how and where to participate in relevant inter-agency coordination. The content of training seminars may include: • all information covered in the orientation seminars; • Emergency individual, family and community psychosocial and mental health assessment skills; 7. After any training, establish a follow-up system for monitoring, support, feedback and supervision of all trainees, as appropriate to the situation. supervision is important to try to ensure that training is actually put into practice. Many training efforts fail because of insufficient follow-up. all training seminars should be followed by continuing monitoring and follow-up training, field-based support, feedback and/or supervision. These follow-up activities should be properly planned before the start of any training. Follow-up can be provided by trainers or alternatively by experienced professionals, well-trained colleagues, a collegial network • Emergency psychosocial and mental health response techniques that can be taught of peers or related professional institutions as available. close supervision is quickly, that are based on the existing capacities, contexts and cultures of the particularly essential for new field staff. trainees and that are known to be effective in related contexts; • Knowledge and skills necessary for implementing interventions that are a part 8. Document and evaluate orientation and training to identify lessons learned, of the minimum response and b identified as necessary through assessment see to be shared with partners and to enhance future responses. action sheet 2.1. This applies to training of: • Health workers see action sheets 5.4, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5 Key resources • Protection workers see action sheets 3.2, 3.3 and 5.4 1. Baron N. 2006. ‘The “TOT”: A global approach for the Training of Trainers for psychosocial and • Formal and non-formal community workers see action sheets 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 mental health interventions in countries affected by war, violence and natural disasters’. Intervention: and 5.4 International Journal of Mental Health, Psychosocial Work and Counselling in Areas of Armed Conflict, 4, 109-126.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 86 Proofread by: Approved by: 2. Jensen S.B. and Baron N. 2003. ‘Training programs for building competence in early intervention skills’. In: Reconstructing Early Intervention After Trauma. Editors: Ørner R. and Schnyder U. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 3. Psychosocial Working Group 2006. CD of training manuals from numerous organisations. action sheet 4.4 Prevent and manage problems in mental health and psychosocial well-being among staff and volunteers Function: Human resources Phase: Minimum Response background 4. Sphere Project 2004. The Humanitarian Charter. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards staff members working in emergency settings tend to work many hours under pressure in Disaster Response. Geneva: Sphere Project. and within difficult security constraints. Many aid workers experience insufficient man- 5. Van der Veer G. 2006. ‘Training trainers for counsellors and psychosocial workers in areas of armed conflict: some basic principles’. Intervention: International Journal of Mental Health, Psychosocial Work and Counselling in Areas of Armed Conflict, 4, 97-108. 6. Weine S. et al. 2002. Guidelines for International Training in Mental Health and Psychosocial Interventions for Trauma Exposed Populations in Clinical and Community Settings. agerial and organisational support, and they tend to report this as their biggest stressor. Moreover, confrontations with horror, danger and human misery are emotionally demanding and potentially affect the mental health and well-being of both paid and volunteer aid workers, whether they come from the country concerned or from abroad. The provision of support to mitigate the possible psychosocial consequences of work in crisis situations is a moral obligation and a responsibility of organisations exposing staff to extremes. For organisations to be effective, managers need to keep Sample process indicators • content of training seminars is based on needs assessment. • aid workers in all sectors can participate in brief and relevant orientation seminars providing essential functional knowledge and skills about mental health and psychosocial support. • Trainers have prior knowledge and skills in related work. their staff healthy. a systemic and integrated approach to staff care is required at all phases of employment – including in emergencies – and at all levels of the organisation to maintain staff well-being and organisational efficiency. The word ‘staff’ in this action sheet refers to paid and volunteer, national and international workers, including drivers and translators, affiliated with an aid organisation. support measures should in principle be equal for national and international staff. However, some structural differences exist between the two. For example, national staff are often recruited from the crisis area and are • Training is followed up by field-based support and supervision. more likely to have been exposed to extremely stressful events or conditions. In example: Sri lanka, 2005 • a local NGO with a long history of providing psychosocial support to war-affected populations temporarily refocused its work to support tsunami survivors. • The NGO organised short action-oriented seminars to teach existing psychosocial field staff essential skills to better support people with specific tsunami-induced mental health and psychosocial problems, together with practical methods of intervention. • after the seminars, follow-up was provided through the NGO’s existing system of weekly supervision. addition, they and their families are often unable to leave the crisis area if the security situation worsens, in contrast with international aid workers, who tend to have good access to evacuation operations. For international workers, on the other hand, particular stressors include separation from their support base, culture shock and adjustment to difficult living conditions. These and other differences are often forgotten or left unaddressed in staff support systems. Humanitarian organisations should work to improve their performance in staff support and to reduce differential support practices for national and international staff. Key actions 1. Ensure the availability of a concrete plan to protect and promote staff well-being for the specific emergency.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 88 Proofread by: Approved by: • While most agencies have a general policy on staff welfare in emergencies, for each • Define working hours and monitor overtime. aim to divide the workload among specific emergency they should also have a concrete plan for proactive staff support. staff. If a 24-hour, seven-days-a-week work pattern is essential in the first weeks of The activities within the plan should be part of the overall emergency budget, and an emergency, then consider rotating staff in shifts. Eight-hour shifts are preferable, should be consistent with the points outlined below. but if that is not possible, shifts should be no longer than 12 hours. Twelve hours on 2. Prepare staff for their jobs and for the emergency context. • Ensure that national and international staff receive information on a their jobs see key action 4 below and b the prevailing environmental and security conditions and possible future changes in these conditions. Provide to international staff and, when appropriate, to national staff information on the local socio-cultural and historical context, including: and 12 hours off is tolerable for a week or two during emergency situations, but it would be helpful to have an extra half-day added to rest schedules about every five days. The hotter or colder an environment, or the more intense the stress, the more breaks are required. • Facilitate communication between staff and their families and other pre-existing support mechanisms. • Basic knowledge of the crisis and the world views of the affected population; 4. Address potential work-related stressors. • Basic information on local cultural attitudes and practices and systems of social organisation; • Ensure clear and updated job descriptions: • Define objectives and activities; • Basic information on staff behaviours that may cause offence in the local socio- • confirm with staff that their roles and tasks are clear; cultural context. • Ensure clear lines of management and communication. • Ensure that all staff receive adequate training on safety and security. • Evaluate daily the security context and other potential sources of stress arising • Ensure that all staff are briefed on a spectrum of stress identification including but from the situation. not restricted to traumatic stress and stress management techniques and on any • Ensure sufficient supplies for staff security bullet-proof vests, communication existing organisational policy for psychosocial support to staff. • Ensure that experienced field management staff are available. 3. Facilitate a healthy working environment. • Implement the organisation’s staff support policy, including a rest and recuperation R&R provision. When the environment provides no opportunities for non-work- related activities, then consider organising a higher frequency of R&R opportunities. • Ensure appropriate food and hygiene for staff, taking into account their religion and culture. • address excessive, unhealthy living practices, such as heavy alcohol use by workers. • Facilitate some privacy in accommodation e.g. if possible, provide separate work and living places. equipment, etc.. • Ensure equality between staff national, international, lower and higher management in the personal decision to accept security risks. Do not force national staff to take risks that international staff are not allowed or not willing to take. • Organise regular staff or team meeting and briefings. • Ensure adequate and culturally sensitive technical supervision e.g. clinical supervision for mental health and psychosocial support staff see also action sheet 4.3. • Build teams, facilitate integration between national and international staff and address intra-team conflict and other negative team dynamics. • Ensure appropriate logistical back-up and supply lines of materials. • Ensure that members of senior management visit field projects regularly.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 90 Proofread by: Approved by: 5. Ensure access to health care and psychosocial support for staff. information for a staff welfare officer/mental health professional in case survivors • Train some staff in providing peer support, including general stress management wish to seek help for any level of distress. and basic psychological first aid PFa for a description of basic PFa, see action sheet 6.1. • When survivors’ acute distress is so severe that it limits their basic functioning or that they are judged to be a risk to themselves or others, they must stop working • For national staff who may be unable to leave the emergency area, organise access and receive immediate care by a mental health professional trained in evidence- to culturally appropriate mental health including psychiatric and psychosocial based treatment of acute traumatic stress. an accompanied medical evacuation may support and physical health care. be necessary. • Ensure stand-by, specialist back-up for urgent psychiatric complaints in staff such • Ensure that a mental health professional contacts all national and international as suicidal feelings, psychoses, severe depression and acute anxiety reactions staff members including translators, drivers, volunteers, etc. who have survived a affecting daily functioning, significant loss of emotional control, etc.. consider the critical incident one to three months following the event. The professional should impact of stigma on the willingness of staff to access mental health assistance and assess how the survivor is functioning and feeling and make referral to clinical adjust back-up support accordingly e.g. international staff may be fearful that they treatment for those with substantial problems that have not healed over time. will be sent home if they seek assistance. • Ensure that staff are provided with prophylactics such as vaccinations and anti- 7. Make support available after the mission/employment. malarials, condoms and when appropriate access to post-exposure prophylactics, • staff members should receive a technical debriefing and job evaluation from and ensure adequate availability of medicines for common physical diseases senior office staff. amongst staff. • staff members should obtain an overall health check-up, including a stress review • Ensure that medical including mental health evacuation or referral procedures are and assessment. in place, including appropriate medically trained staff to accompany evacuees. • staff support mechanisms should be made available upon request. 6. Provide support to staff who have experienced or witnessed extreme events critical incidents, potentially traumatic events. • For all critical incident survivors, make basic psychological first aid PFa • Brief informational materials should be provided to help people understand and manage stress. This material should include an updated referral list of mental health professionals as well as opportunities for peer support. immediately available for a description of basic PFa, see action sheet 6.1. as part Key resources of PFa, assess and address the basic needs and concerns of survivors. although natural opportunities should be provided for sharing among survivors, they should not be pushed to describe events in detail nor should they be pushed to share or listen to details of other survivors’ experiences. Existing positive and negative coping methods should be discussed, and use of alcohol and drugs as a way of coping should be explicitly discouraged, as survivors are often at increased risk of developing addiction. • Make available appropriate self-care materials see action sheet 8.2 for guidance on developing culture-appropriate materials. The materials should include contact 1. Action Without Borders/Idealist.org 2004. Website with resources on stress management for aid workers, managers and workers’ families. 2. Antares Foundation 2005. Managing Stress in Humanitarian Workers. Guidelines for Good Practice. Amsterdam: Antares Foundation. www.antaresfoundation.org 3. Headington Institute 2005. Various resources and free online training modules on understanding and coping with the stress associated with humanitarian work. 4. McFarlane C. 2004. ‘Adjustment of humanitarian aid workers’. Australasian Journal of Disaster and Trauma Studies. ISSN: 1174-4707, Volume 2004-1. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 92 Proofread by: Approved by: 5. National Child Traumatic Stress Network and National Center for PTSD 2006. Psychological First Aid: Field Operations Guide Second edition. 2ndEditionwithappendices.pdf A potential limitation of this resource is that it was specifically developed for Western disaster settings. The guide describes an advanced form of psychological first aid because it was developed for use by previously trained mental health professionals. action sheet 5.1 Facilitate conditions for community mobilisation, ownership and control of emergency response in all sectors domain: community mobilisation and support Phase: Minimum Response background 6. People in Aid 2003. Code of Good Practice in the Management and Support of Aid Personnel. The process of response to an emergency should be owned and controlled as much Sample process indicators as possible by the affected population, and should make use of their own support structures, including local government structures. In these guidelines, the term ‘community mobilisation’ refers to efforts made from both inside and outside the • The organisation has funded plans to protect and promote staff well-being for community to involve its members groups of people, families, relatives, peers, the emergency. • Workers who survive a critical incident have immediate access to psychological first aid. • Workers who survive a critical incident are systematically screened for mental health problems one to three months following the incident, and appropriate support is arranged when necessary. example: unspecified country, 1999 • after a violent hostage situation involving staff of an international NGO, all national and international staff received an operational debriefing and information on how and where to receive support from a national or foreign doctor or mental health worker at any time it was needed. • In the days following the incident, a staff counsellor organised two meetings to discuss with staff how they were doing. care and medical evacuation was organised for a person with severe anxiety problems. • One month later, a trained volunteer contacted all national and international staff individually to check their well-being and organised support as necessary. neighbours or others who have a common interest in all the discussions, decisions and actions that affect them and their future. as people become more involved, they are likely to become more hopeful, more able to cope and more active in rebuilding their own lives and communities. at every step, relief efforts should support participation, build on what local people are already doing to help themselves and avoid doing for local people what they can do for themselves. There are varying degrees of community participation: • The community to a large extent controls the aid process and decides on aid responses, with government and non-government organisations providing direct advocacy and support. • The community or its representative members have an equal partner role in all major decisions and activities undertaken in partnership with various government and non-government organisations and community actors. • The community or its representative members are consulted on all major decisions. • The community acts as an implementing partner e.g. supporting food distribution or self-help activities, while major decisions are made by government and non- government organisations. • community members are not involved in designing and only minimally involved in implementing relief activities.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 94 Proofread by: Approved by: Critical steps in community mobilisation • Recognition by community members that they have a common concern and will be more effective if they work together i.e. ‘We need to support each other to deal with this’. • Development of the sense of responsibility and ownership that comes with this recognition ‘This is happening to us and we can do something about it’. when outside agencies work in an uncoordinated manner. For example, a year after the 2004 tsunami in southeast asia, a community of 50 families in northern sri Lanka, questioned in a door-to-door psychosocial survey, identified 27 different NGOs offering or providing help. One interviewee stated: ‘We never had leaders here. Most people are relatives. When someone faced a problem, neighbours came to help. But now some people act as if they are leaders, to negotiate donations. Relatives do not help each other any more.’ • Identification of internal community resources and knowledge, and individual as this example indicates, it can be damaging if higher degrees of community skills and talents ‘Who can do, or is already doing, what; what resources do participation are facilitated by agencies with their own agendas offering help, but we have; what else can we do?’. • Identification of priority issues ‘What we’re really concerned about is…’. • community members plan and manage activities using their internal resources. • Growing capacity of community members to continue and increase the effectiveness of this action. Adapted from Donahue and Williamson 1999, Community Mobilization to Mitigate the Impacts of HIV/AIDS, Displaced Children and Orphans Fund It is important to note that communities tend to include multiple sub-groups that have different needs and which often compete for influence and power. Facilitating genuine community participation requires understanding the local power structure and lacking deep bonds with or understanding of the community. It is particularly important to facilitate the conditions in which communities organise aid responses themselves, rather than forcing the community to adhere to an outside agenda. Key actions 1. Coordinate efforts to mobilise communities. • actively identify, and coordinate with, existing processes of community mobilisation see action sheet 1.1. Local people often have formal and non-formal leaders and also community structures that may be helpful in coordination, although care should be taken to ensure that these do not exclude particular people. • It is important to work in partnership with local government, where supportive patterns of community conflict, working with different sub-groups and avoiding the government services are present. privileging of particular groups. The political and emergency aspects of the situation determine the extent of participation that is most appropriate. In very urgent or dangerous situations, it may 2. Assess the political, social and security environment at the earliest possible stage. In addition to reviewing and gathering general information on the context see action be necessary to provide services with few community inputs. community involvement sheet 2.1: when there is inadvertent mingling of perpetrators and victims can also lead to terror • Observe and talk informally with numerous people representative of the affected and killings as occurred, for example in the Great Lakes crisis in 1994. However, in community; most circumstances, higher levels of participation are both possible and desirable. Past experience suggests that significant numbers of community members are likely to func- tion well enough to take leading roles in organising relief tasks and that the vast majority may help with implementing relief activities. although outside aid agencies often say that they have no time to talk to the population, they have a responsibility to talk with and learn from local people, and usually there is enough time for this process. Nevertheless, a critical approach is necessary. External processes often induce communities to adapt to the agenda of aid organisations. This is a problem, especially • Identify and talk with male and female key informants such as leaders, teachers, healers, etc. who can share information about a issues of power, organisation and decision-making processes in the community, b what cultural rules to follow, and c what difficulties and dangers to be aware of in community mobilisation. 3. Talk with a variety of key informants and formal and informal groups, learning how local people are organising and how different agencies can participate in the  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 96 Proofread by: Approved by: relief effort. communities include sub-groups that differ in interests and power, and also be used for protecting and supporting children see action sheets 3.2 and 5.4, these different sub-groups should be considered in all phases of community for learning activities see action sheet 7.1, and for communicating key information mobilisation. Often it is useful to meet separately with sub-groups defined along lines to community members see action sheets 8.1 and 8.2. of religion or ethnicity, political affinity, gender and age, or caste and socio-economic class. ask groups questions such as: 6. Promote community mobilisation processes. • In previous emergencies, how have local people confronted the crisis? • In what ways are people helping each other now? • How can people here participate in the emergency response? • Who are the key people or groups who could help organise health supports, shelter supports, etc.? • How can each area of a camp or village ‘personalise’ its space? • Would it be helpful to activate pre-existing structures and decision-making processes? If yes, what can be done to enable people in a camp setting to group themselves e.g. by village or clan? • security conditions permitting, organise discussions regarding the social, political and economic context and the causes of the crisis. Providing a sense of purpose and meaning can be a powerful source of psychosocial support. • Facilitate the conditions for a collective reflection process involving key actors, community groups or the community as a whole regarding: • Vulnerabilities to be addressed at present and vulnerabilities that can be expected in the future; • capacities, and abilities to activate and build on these; • Potential sources of resilience identified by the group; • Mechanisms that have helped community members in the past to cope with • If there are conflicts over resources or facilities, how could the community reduce tragedy, violence and loss; these? What is the process for settling differences? 4. Facilitate the participation of marginalised people. • Be aware of issues of power and social injustice. • Include marginalised people in the planning and delivery of aid. • Organisations e.g. local women’s groups, youth groups or professional, labour or political organisations that could be involved in the process of bringing aid; • How other communities have responded successfully during crises. • One of the core activities of a participatory mobilisation process is to help people to make connections between what the community had previously, where its members • Initiate discussions about ways that empower marginalised groups and prevent or are now, where they want to go, and the ways and means of achieving that. Facili- reduce stigmatisation or discrimination. • Ensure, if possible, that such discussions take note of existing authority structures, including local government structures. • Engage youth, who are often viewed as a problem but who can be a valuable resource for emergency response, as they are often able to adapt quickly and creatively to rapidly changing situations. 5. Establish safe and sufficient spaces early on to support planning discussions and the dissemination of information. safe spaces, which can be either covered or open, allow groups to meet to plan how to participate in the emergency response and to conduct self-help activities see action sheet 5.2 or religious and cultural activities see action sheet 5.3. safe spaces can tation of this process means creating the conditions for people to achieve their goals in a manner that is non-directive and as non-intrusive as possible. If needed, it may be useful to organise activities e.g. based on popular education methodologies that facilitate productive dialogue and exchange. This reflective process should be recorded, if resources permit, for dissemination to other organisations working on community mobilisation. • The above process should lead to a discussion of emergency ‘action plans’ that coordinate activities and distribute duties and responsibilities, taking into account agreed priorities and the feasibility of the actions. Planning could also foresee longer-term scenarios and identify potentially fruitful actions in advance. It should be clearly understood whether the action is the responsibility of the community itself or of external agents such as the state. If the responsibility is with the  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  example: Mexico, 1985 • In 1985, following a devastating earthquake in Mexico city – where there were strong, pre-existing community organisations – people from the local community organised the emergency relief efforts. • Local people did most of the clean-up work, distributed food and other supplies, organised temporary shelters and designed new living quarters. • The local emergency response developed into a social movement that assisted people for a period of five years. • studies conducted three and five years after the earthquake reported no increase in the prevalence of mental health problems. ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 98 Proofread by: Approved by: community, a community action plan may be developed. If the responsibility is with external agents, then a community advocacy plan could be put in place. Key resources 1. Action on the Rights of the Child. Community Mobilisation. 2. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP 2003. Participation by Crisis-Affected Populations in Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners. English; psicosocial.net Spanish 3. Donahue J. and Williamson J. 1999. Community Mobilization to Mitigate the Impacts of HIV/AIDS. Displaced Children and Orphans Fund. 4. Norwegian Refugee Council/Camp Management Project 2004, revised 2007. Camp Management Toolkit. 5. Regional Psychosocial Support Initiative REPSSI 2006. Journey of Life – A Community Workshop to Support Children. 6. Segerström E. 2001. ‘Community Participation’ in The Refugee Experience, Oxford Refugee Studies Centre. 7. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response, Common standard 1: participation, pp.28-29. Geneva: Sphere Project. 8. UNHCR 2002. Guide for Shelter Planning chapters on Community Participation and Community Organising. English; Spanish 9. UNHCR 2006. Tool for Participatory Assessment in Operations. Sample process indicators • safe spaces have been established and are used for planning meetings and information sharing. • Local people conduct regular meetings on how to organise and implement the emergency response. • Local men, women, and youth – including those from marginalised groups – are involved in making key decisions in the emergency.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 100 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 5.2 Facilitate community self-help and social support domain: community mobilisation and support Phase: Minimum Response background all communities contain effective, naturally occurring psychosocial supports and sources of coping and resilience. Nearly all groups of people affected by an emergency include helpers to whom people turn for psychosocial support in times of need. In families and communities, steps should be taken at the earliest opportunity to activate and strengthen local supports and to encourage a spirit of community self-help. a self-help approach is vital, because having a measure of control over some aspects of their lives promotes people’s mental health and psychosocial well-being following overwhelming experiences. affected groups of people typically have formal and informal structures through which they organise themselves to meet collective needs. Even if these structures have been disrupted, they can be reactivated and supported as part of the process of enabling an effective emergency response. strengthening and building on existing local support systems and structures will enable • Meet and talk with identified potential helpers, including those from marginalised groups, and ask whether they are in a position to help. • Identify social groups or mechanisms that functioned prior to the emergency and that could be revived to help meet immediate needs. These might include collective work groups, self-help groups, rotating savings and credit groups, burial societies and youth and women’s groups. 2. Facilitate the process of community identification of priority actions through participatory rural appraisal and other participatory methods. • Identify available non-professional or professional supports that could be activated immediately or strengthened. • Promote a collective process of reflection about people’s past, present and future that enables planning. By taking stock of supports that were present in the past but which have been disrupted in the emergency, people can choose to reactivate useful supports. By reflecting on where they want to be in several years’ time, they can envision their future and take steps to achieve their vision. locally owned, sustainable and culturally appropriate community responses. In such • Discuss with key actors or community groups: an approach, the role of outside agencies is less to provide direct services than to facilitate psychosocial supports that build the capacities of locally available resources. Facilitating community social support and self-help requires sensitivity and critical thinking. communities often include diverse and competing sub-groups with different agendas and levels of power. It is essential to avoid strengthening particular sub-groups while marginalising others, and to promote the inclusion of people who are usually invisible or left out of group activities. Key actions 1. Identify human resources in the local community. • Organisations that were once working to confront crisis and that may be useful to reactivate; • Mechanisms rituals, festivals, women’s discussion groups, etc. that have helped community members in the past to cope with tragedy, violence or loss; • How the current situation has disrupted social networks and coping mechanisms; • How people have been affected by the crisis; • What priorities people should address in moving towards their vision of the future; Examples of such resources are significant elders, community leaders including local • What actions would make it possible for people to achieve their priority goals; government leaders, traditional healers, religious leaders/groups, teachers, health and • What successful experiences of organisations have been seen in their and mental health workers, social workers, youth and women’s groups, neighbourhood neighbouring communities. groups, union leaders and business leaders. a valuable strategy is to map local resources see also action sheet 2.1 by asking community members about the people they turn to for support at times of crisis. Particular names or groups of people are likely to be reported repeatedly, indicating potential helpers within the affected population. • share results of this identification process with the coordination group see action sheets 1.1 and 2.1. 00 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response 0 ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 102 Proofread by: Approved by: 3. Support community initiatives, actively encouraging those that promote family and community support for all emergency-affected community members, including people at greatest risk. • Determine what members of the affected population are already doing to help themselves and each other, and look for ways to reinforce their efforts. For example, if local people are organising educational activities but need basic resources such • Protection of street children and children previously associated with fighting forces and armed groups, and their integration into the community; • activities that facilitate the inclusion of isolated individuals orphans, widows, widowers, elderly people, people with severe mental disorders or disabilities or those without their families into social networks; as paper and writing instruments, support their activities by helping to provide the • Women’s support and activity groups, where appropriate; materials needed while recognising the possible problem of creating dependency. • supportive parenting programmes; ask regularly what can be done to support local efforts. • support community initiatives suggested by community members during the participatory assessment, as appropriate. • sports and youth clubs and other recreational activities, e.g. for adolescents at risk of substance abuse or of other social and behavioural problems; • Re-establishment of normal cultural and religious events for all see action sheet • Encourage when appropriate the formation of groups, particularly ones that build 5.3; on pre-existing groups, to conduct various activities of self-support and planning. 4. Encourage and support additional activities that promote family and community support for all emergency-affected community members and, specifically, for people at greatest risk. In addition to supporting the community’s own initiatives, a range of additional relevant initiatives may be considered. Facilitate community inputs in a selecting which activities to support, b designing, implementing and monitoring the selected activities, and c supporting and facilitating referral processes. Examples of potentially relevant activities are provided in the box below. • Ongoing group discussion about community members’ mental health and psychosocial well-being; • Building networks that link affected communities with aid agencies, government and various services; • • communal healing practices see action sheet 5.3; Other activities that help community members gain or regain control over their lives; • activities that promote non-violent handling of conflict e.g. discussions, drama and songs, joint activities by members of opposing sides, etc.; • structured activities for children and youth including non-formal education, examples of activities that promote family and community support for emergency- as in child-friendly spaces: see action sheet 7.1; affected community members and, specifically, for people at greatest risk • Organising access to information about what is happening, services, missing • Group discussions on how the community may help at-risk groups identified persons, security, etc. see action sheet 8.1; in the assessment as needing protection and support see action sheet 2.1; • Organising access to shelter and basic services see action sheets 9.1, 10.1 • community child protection committees that identify at-risk children, monitor and 11.1. risks, intervene when possible and refer cases to protection authorities or community services, when appropriate see action sheet 3.2; 5. Provide short, participatory training sessions where appropriate see Action • Organising structured and monitored foster care rather than orphanages for separated children, whenever possible see action sheet 3.2; • Family tracing and reunification for all age groups see action sheet 3.2; Sheet 4.3, coupled with follow-up support. Where local support systems are incomplete or are too weak to achieve particular goals, it may be useful to train community workers, including volunteers, to perform tasks such as: 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response 0 ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 104 Proofread by: Approved by: • Identifying and responding to the special needs of community members who are Key resources not functioning well; • Developing and providing supports in a culturally appropriate way; • Providing basic support, i.e. psychological first aid, for those acutely distressed after exposure to extreme stressors see action sheet 6.1; 1. IASC 2005. Guidelines for Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings. Geneva: IASC. 2. IFRC 2003. ‘Promoting community self-help’, in Community-based Psychological Support: A Training Manual, pp.57-65. Geneva: International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. Available in English, Arabic, French and Spanish at: • creating mother-child groups for discussion and to provide stimulation for smaller 3. Norwegian Refugee Council/Camp Management Project 2004, revised 2007. Camp Management children see action sheet 5.4; Toolkit. • assisting families, where appropriate, with problem-solving strategies and knowledge about child rearing; • Identifying, protecting and ensuring care for separated children; • Including people with disabilities in various activities; • supporting survivors of gender-based violence; • Facilitating release and integration of boys and girls associated with fighting forces and armed groups; • setting up self-help groups; 4. Pretty J.N. and Vodouhê D.S. 1997. ‘Using rapid or participatory rural appraisal’. FAO: New York. 5. Refugee Studies Centre and UNICEF 2002. ‘Addressing the needs of children, their families and communities’, in Working with Children in Unstable Situations – Principles and Concepts for Psycho-social Interventions draft, pp.47-79. man/Documents/1Disaster-general/WorkWithChild.UnstableSitua.pdf 6. Regional Psychosocial Support Initiative REPSSI 2006. The Journey of Life awareness and action workshops. 7. Save the Children 1996. Promoting Psychosocial Well-Being Among Children Affected by Armed Conflict and Displacement: Principles and approaches. • Engaging youth e.g. in positive leadership, organising youth clubs, sports activities, technical-resources/emergencies-protection/psychsocwellbeing2.pdf conflict resolution dialogue, education on reproductive health and other life skills training; Sample process indicators • Involving adults and adolescents in concrete, purposeful, common interest activities e.g. constructing/organising shelter, organising family tracing, distributing food, cooking, sanitation, organising vaccinations, teaching children; • Referring affected people to relevant legal, health, livelihood, nutrition and social services, if appropriate and if available. 6. When necessary, advocate within the community and beyond on behalf of marginalised and at-risk people. Typically, those who were already marginalised before the start of a crisis receive scant attention and remain invisible and unsupported, both during and after the crisis. Humanitarian workers may address this problem by linking their work to social justice, speaking out on behalf of people who may otherwise be overlooked and enabling marginalised people to speak out effectively for themselves. • steps have been taken to identify, activate and strengthen local resources that support mental health and psychosocial well-being. • community processes and initiatives include and support the people at greatest risk. • When necessary, brief training is provided to build the capacity of local supports. example: bosnia, 1990s • In Bosnia, following the wars of the 1990s, many women in rural areas who had survived rape and losses needed psychosocial support, but did not want to talk with psychologists or psychiatrists because they felt shame and stigma. • Following a practice that existed before the war, women gathered in knitting groups to knit, drink coffee and also to support each other. • Outside agencies played a facilitating role by providing small funds for wool and by developing referral supports. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response 0 ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 106 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 5.3 Facilitate conditions for appropriate communal cultural, spiritual and religious healing practices domain: community mobilisation and support Phase: Minimum Response background In emergencies, people may experience collective cultural, spiritual and religious stresses that may require immediate attention. Providers of aid from outside a local culture commonly think in terms of individual symptoms and reactions, such as depression and traumatic stress, but many survivors, particularly in non-Western societies, experience suffering in spiritual, religious, family or community terms. survivors might feel significant stress due to their inability to perform culturally appropriate burial rituals, in situations where the bodies of the deceased are not available for burial or where there is a lack of financial resources or private spaces needed to conduct such rituals. similarly, people might experience intense stress if they are unable to engage in normal religious, spiritual or cultural practices. This action sheet concerns general communal religious and cultural including spiritual supports for groups of people who may not necessarily seek care, while action sheet 6.4 covers traditional care for individuals and families seeking help. collective stresses of this nature can frequently be addressed by enabling the conduct of appropriate cultural, spiritual and religious practices. The conduct of death or burial rituals can ease distress and enable mourning and grief. In some settings, cleansing and healing ceremonies contribute to recovery and reintegration. For devout populations, faith or practices such as praying provide support and meaning in difficult circumstances. Understanding and, as appropriate, enabling or supporting cultural healing practices can increase psychosocial well-being for many survivors. Ignoring such healing practices, on the other hand, can prolong distress and potentially cause harm by marginalising helpful cultural ways of coping. In many contexts, working with religious leaders and resources is an essential part of emergency psychosocial support. Engaging with local religion or culture often challenges non-local relief workers to consider world views very different from their own. Because some local practices cause harm for example, in contexts where spirituality and religion are Key actions 1. Approach local religious and spiritual leaders and other cultural guides to learn their views on how people have been affected and on practices that would support the affected population. Useful steps are to: • Review existing assessments see action sheet 2.1 to avoid the risk of repetitive questioning; • approach local religious and spiritual leaders, preferably by means of an interviewer of the same ethnic or religious group, to learn more about their views see key action 3 below. since different groups and orientations may be present in the affected population, it is important to approach all key religious groups or orientations. The act of asking helps to highlight spiritual and religious issues, and what is learned can guide the use of aid to support local resources that improve well-being. 2. Exercise ethical sensitivity. Using a skilled translator if necessary, work in the local language, asking questions that a cultural guide person knowledgeable about local culture has indicated are appropriate. It may be difficult for survivors to share information about their religion or spirituality with outsiders, particularly in situations of genocide and armed conflict where their religious beliefs and/or ethnic identities have been assaulted. Experience indicates that it is possible for humanitarian workers to talk with religious and spiritual leaders if they demonstrate respect and communicate that their purpose is to learn how best to support the affected people and avoid damaging practices. In many emergencies, religious and spiritual leaders have been key partners in educating humanitarian workers about how to support affected people. Ethical sensitivity is needed also because some spiritual, cultural and religious practices e.g. the practice of widow immolation cause harm. It is important to maintain a critical perspective, supporting cultural, religious and spiritual practices only if they fit with human rights standards. Media coverage of local practices can be problematic, and should be permitted only with the full consent of involved community members. politicised, humanitarian workers should think critically and support local practices 3. Learn about cultural, religious and spiritual supports and coping mechanisms. and resources only if they fit with international standards of human rights. Once rapport has been established, ask questions such as: • What do you believe are the spiritual causes and effects of the emergency? 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response 0 ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 108 Proofread by: Approved by: • How have people been affected culturally or spiritually? Key resources • What should properly happen when people have died? 1. PAHO/WHO 2004. ‘Sociocultural aspects’. In: Management of Dead Bodies in Disaster Situations, • are there rituals or cultural practices that could be conducted, and what would be the appropriate timing for them? • Who can best provide guidance on how to conduct these rituals and handle the burial of bodies? • Who in the community would greatly benefit from specific cleansing or healing rituals and why? • are you willing to advise international workers present in this area on how to support people spiritually and how to avoid spiritual harm? pp.85-106. Washington: PAHO. 2. Psychosocial Working Group 2003. Psychosocial Intervention in Complex Emergencies: A Conceptual Framework. 3. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. Mental and social aspects of health, pp.291-293. Geneva: Sphere Project. If feasible, make repeated visits to build trust and learn more about religious and Sample process indicators cultural practices. also, if possible, confirm the information collected by discussing it • Local cultural, religious and spiritual supports have been identified, and the with local anthropologists or other cultural guides who have extensive knowledge of information is shared with humanitarian workers. local culture and practices. • Obstacles to the conduct of appropriate practices have been identified and removed or reduced. 4. Disseminate the information collected among humanitarian actors at sector and • steps have been taken to enable the use of practices that are valued by the affected coordination meetings. people and consistent with international human rights standards. share the information collected with colleagues in different sectors, including at inter- sectoral MHPss coordination meetings and at other venues, to raise awareness about example: Angola, 1996 cultural and religious issues and practices. Point out the potential harm done by e.g. unceremonious mass burials or delivery of food or other materials deemed to be offensive for religious reasons. 5. Facilitate conditions for appropriate healing practices. The role of humanitarian workers is to facilitate the use of practices that are important to affected people and that are compatible with international human rights standards. Key steps are to: • Work with selected leaders to identify how to enable appropriate practices; • a former boy soldier said he felt stressed and fearful because the spirit of a man he had killed visited him at night. The problem was communal since his family and community viewed him as contaminated and feared retaliation by the spirit if he was not cleansed. • Humanitarian workers consulted local healers, who said that they could expel the angry spirit by conducting a cleansing ritual, which the boy said he needed. • an international NGO provided the necessary food and animals offered as a sacrifice, and the healer conducted a ritual believed to purify the boy and protect the community. afterwards, the boy and people in the community reported • Identify obstacles e.g. lack of resources to the conduct of these practices; increased well-being. • Remove the obstacles e.g. provide space for rituals and resources such as food for funeral guests and materials for burials; • accept existing mixed practices e.g. local and Westernised where appropriate. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response 0 ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 110 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 5.4 Facilitate support for young children 0–8 years and their care-givers domain: community mobilisation and support Phase: Minimum Response background • Prioritise keeping breastfeeding mothers and children together. • Teach older children songs that include their family name, village and contact information. • Tag children to minimise separation. Early childhood 0–8 years is the most important period in human life for physical, b Reunify children and parents see action sheet 3.2. If children are separated: cognitive, emotional and social development. During this period, critical brain • contact the proper reunification organisation. development occurs rapidly and depends on adequate protection, stimulation and • Facilitate tracing and reunification. Record the date and place whenever separated effective care. Early losses e.g. the death of a parent, witnessing physical or sexual children are found, and collect information from children themselves, using age- violence, and other distressing events can disrupt bonding and undermine healthy appropriate methods such as having them draw where they lived or tell about long-term social and emotional development. However, most children recover from themselves. such experiences, especially if they are given appropriate care and support. In emergencies, the well-being of young children depends to a large extent on their family and community situations. Their well-being may suffer if they have overwhelmed, exhausted or depressed mothers or care-givers who are physically or emotionally unable to provide effective care, routine and support. children who have been separated from their parents may be placed in temporary care that is unsatisfactory. In the community, both parents and children may be at risk due to disrupted medical services, inadequate nutrition and a range of protection threats. In emergencies, early childhood programmes should be coordinated see action sheet 1.1 and informed by appropriate assessments see action sheet 2.1, including data estimating the number and ages of children under eight years old, the number of pregnant women and the number of women with newborns. Early childhood programmes should support the care of young children by their families and other • Keep clothing with the child, as one of the key means of identifying and reunifying separated children with their parents. c Facilitate alternative care arrangements. In crises and emergencies where other options of care are not available, it may be necessary to organise temporary centres to protect separated children until a long-term solution is identified. While waiting to be reunited with their families, separated children may be fostered with an individual or a family who can provide appropriate care and protection. Orphanages should be viewed as a last resort, as they usually do not provide appropriate support. • Decide on care arrangements according to what is in the best interest of the child within the local cultural context. • Keep the child within the extended family and/or community whenever possible and avoid separating siblings from one another. care-givers. Early childhood activities should provide stimulation, facilitate basic • Wherever possible, arrange for one continuous foster family, avoiding multiple nutrition in situations of extreme food shortage, enable protection and promote foster families. bonding between infants and care-givers. such activities aim to meet children’s core needs and help to reduce emergency-induced distress in safe, protected and structured settings, while providing relief and support to care-givers. Key actions 1. Keep children with their mothers, fathers, family or other familiar care-givers. a Prevent separation. In emergencies where population movement is likely, support • For newborns who have lost their mother or who have been separated from their parents, meet basic needs for food, warmth and care, remembering that in some cultures female children may be at greater risk of neglect. If children have already been placed in orphanages or other institutions, there should be a rapid assessment to identify their condition and guide possible steps to promote early childhood development EcD activities. communities and families in developing culturally acceptable and appropriate methods 2. Promote the continuation of breastfeeding. to avoid separation. Breastfeeding is optimal for the physical, psychosocial and cognitive well-being of 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 112 Proofread by: Approved by: infants and toddlers. Breastfeeding supports the child’s cognitive development, olds are addressed in action sheet 7.1. Train parents, siblings, grandparents and comforts the child, is likely to strengthen the mother-child bond and is easy to prepare, youth to work with available staff, and also to take learning home to their families free and usually very safe regarding caveats on safety, see UNIcEF 2002 under on how they can assist in the healthy development of young children. consider Key resources for guidance on breastfeeding and HIV/aIDs. engaging trusted older women and female youth as volunteers in safe spaces. • Encourage breastfeeding through individual support and community dialogues. • consider using known games, songs and dances and also home-made toys, since • counsel mothers of newborns and relatives in newborn care, with regard to these are most practical in an emergency. exclusive breastfeeding, wrapping and warming their baby, deferred bathing • Include an area for care-giver/child play and interaction in all services for younger and hygiene. children, such as therapeutic feeding programmes, hospitals and clinics, as well • avoid routine distribution of milk formulas as they discourage breastfeeding. as in areas for distribution of food and non-food items. • Make supplemental feeding for pregnant and lactating women a high priority. • Facilitate activities for young children that promote social community-building • avoid excessive pressure on mothers to breastfeed. Mothers who refuse to and non-violence in violence-affected communities. breastfeed, who find it very difficult or who cannot breastfeed should receive • Include children with special needs in care activities, games and social support proper support. at the community level. 3. Facilitate play, nurturing care and social support. WHO 2006 reference under Key resources. • For specific guidance on stimulating young children in food crises, see the a variety of EcD activities should be provided during emergencies. These activities could include parent education, home visits, shared child care and communal play groups, ‘safe spaces’, toy libraries and informal parent gatherings in safe spaces see action sheet 5.1. 4. Care for care-givers. In emergencies, it is important to organise meetings at which care-givers of young children can discuss the past, present and future, share problem-solving and support • Organise locally appropriate opportunities for active play, stimulation and one another in caring effectively for their children. socialisation. These may help to mitigate the negative psychosocial impact of crisis situations. • Tailor the activities to the children’s age, gender and culture. To minimise distress, children require a sense of routine and participation in normalising activities, which should reflect their usual daily activities e.g. a child from a nomadic background who has never been in school may find formal education neither normalising nor comforting. In programme planning and implementation, use culturally relevant developmental milestones such as rites of passage rituals, which may be more appropriate than Western developmental models. • Include in safe spaces see action sheets 5.1 and 7.1 activities that specifically support very young children. If conditions permit, organise activity groups roughly according to children’s age/stage of development: 0–12/18 months pre-verbal, not ambulatory, 12/18 months to three years, and 3–6 years. activities for 6–8-year- • In safe spaces see action sheets 5.1 and 7.1, organise support groups in which parents/mothers can talk about their own suffering. • advise parents not to talk about the details of horrific events in front of or with their children. • During small group activities for families and their young children, parents have the opportunity to learn from the interactions of others with their children. When positive parent-child interaction occurs, point this out and encourage other parents to interact with their own children in a similar manner. • Help parents and care-givers to understand the changes they see in their children following a crisis. Explain that behaviour such as heightened fear of others and withdrawal, or increased fighting with other children, are common reactions to stress and reflect no failure on the care-giver’s part.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 114 Proofread by: Approved by: • share information with parents and care-givers on how to identify problems 9. UNICEF and Macksoud M. 2000. Helping Children Cope with the Stresses of War: and support the psychosocial health of their children, including how to control, regulate and modify aggressive behaviour by children through consistent discipline and limit-setting. • Identify harmful responses to a child’s stress, such as beating, abandonment or stigmatisation, and suggest alternative strategies to parents and community leaders. A Manual for Parents and Teachers. 10. UNICEF 2002. HIV and Infant Feeding. 11. WHO 2006. Mental health and psychosocial well-being among children in severe food shortage situations. Geneva: WHO. • Parents who have difficulties in caring for their children because of severe mental 12. Women’s Commission for Refugee Women and Children 2005. Field-friendly Guide to Integrate health problems should be referred to receive appropriate support from health Emergency Obstetric Care in Humanitarian Programs. services staff if trained in mental health care; see action sheet 6.2. In particular, severe depression may interfere with the ability to care for children. Key resources • The inter-agency Guiding Principles on Unaccompanied and separated children 1. Bernard van Leer Foundation 2005. Early Childhood Matters. Volume 104: Responding to young are implemented. children in post-emergency situations. • Early childhood development EcD activities are organised for young girls Sample process indicators storepublications/EarlyChildhoodMatters104/file 2. Consultative Group on Early Childhood Care and Development 1996. Children as Zones of Peace: Working with Children Affected by Armed Violence. ofPeace;WorkingwithChildrenAffectedbyArmedViolence-13052001-135324.pdf 3. Emergency Nutrition Network Online 2006. Infant Feeding in Emergencies. 4. Human Sciences Research Council of South Africa HSRC. Psychosocial Support Resources: Davids D. Hesperian Foundation, Emotional Behaviour Book. and boys 0–8 years and their care-givers. • Breastfeeding is promoted. • care-givers meet in safe spaces to discuss challenges and to support each other. example: Angola, 1999–2000 • Young children in IDP camps had few activities available, and parents spent little time interacting with young children. • Having identified adults whom local people sought out for advice and help with 5. ICRC, IRC, Save the Children UK, UNICEF, UNHCR and World Vision 2004. Inter-Agency Guiding Principles on Unaccompanied and Separated Children. Save the Children UK. young children, an international NGO provided training on how to organise age- and gender-appropriate activities that provided stimulation and promoted positive social interaction. 6. INFO Reports/Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health 2006. Breastfeeding Questions Answered: A Guide for Providers. • although there were no schools or other centres, local participants conducted activities under the shade of trees, engaged mothers in the activities and made referrals for children needing special assistance. These activities benefited several 7. Save the Children UK 2006. ECD Guidelines for Emergencies – the Balkans. thousand mothers and children. n=policy&subsection=details&pagelang=en 8. UNESCO and IIEP 2006. Guidebook for Planning Education in Emergencies and Reconstruction.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 116 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 6.1 Include specific psychological and social considerations in provision of general health care domain: Health services Phase: Minimum Response background guidance, see aLNaP reference under Key resources and action sheets 2.1, • Maximise access to health care by locating any new services within safe walking distance of communities. aim to balance gender and include representatives of key minority and language groups among health staff to maximise survivors’ access There is a gap in most emergencies between mental health and psychosocial supports to health services. Use translators if necessary. MHPss and general health care. However, the way in which health care is provided often affects the psychosocial well-being of people living through an emergency. compassionate, emotionally supportive care protects the well-being of survivors, whereas disrespectful treatment or poor communication threatens dignity, deters people from seeking health care and undermines adherence to treatment regimes, including for life-threatening diseases such as HIV/aIDs. Physical and mental health problems frequently co-occur, especially among survivors of emergencies. However, strong inter-relationships between social, mental and physical aspects of health are commonly ignored in the rush to organise and provide health care. Often general health care settings – such as primary health care PHc settings – offer the first point of contact for helping people with mental health and • Protect and promote patients’ rights to: • Informed consent for both sexes before medical and surgical procedures clear explanations of procedures are especially necessary when emergency health care is provided by international staff, who may approach medicine differently; • Privacy as much as possible – e.g. put a curtain around the consultation area; • confidentiality of information related to health status of patients. caution is especially needed for data related to human rights violations e.g. torture, rape. • Use essential drugs consistent with the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines to facilitate affordable and thus sustainable care. Use locally available, generic medicines as far as possible. psychosocial problems. General health care providers frequently encounter survivors’ • Record and analyse sex- and age-disaggregated data in health information systems. emotional issues in treating diseases and injuries, especially in treating the health consequences of human rights violations such as torture and rape. some forms of psychological support i.e. very basic psychological first aid for people in acute psychological distress do not require advanced knowledge and can easily be taught to workers who have no previous training in mental health. This action sheet covers psychological and social considerations in the overall provision of general health care in emergencies. action sheet 6.2 describes the management of severe mental disorder in emergencies. The actions below apply to both pre-existing and emergency-related health services. • communicate important emergency-related health information to the affected population see action sheet 8.1. 2. Provide birth and death certificates if needed. Death certification is important for claims including inheritance claims by surviving family members. Birth certification is often essential for identification and citizenship claims and thus for access to government services e.g. education and for protection against illegal adoption, forced recruitment and trafficking. If regular authorities are not able to provide these documents, health care workers should provide them. Key actions 1. Include specific social considerations in providing general health care. Develop equitable, appropriate and accessible health care consistent with the 3. Facilitate referral to key resources outside the health system, including to: • Locally available social services and supports and protection mechanisms in the sphere minimum standards on health to preserve life with dignity. The following community see action sheets 3.2, 3.3 and 5.2; social considerations apply: • Legal support and/or testimony services for survivors of human rights violations, • Maximise participation of the affected male and female population in the design, as feasible and appropriate; implementation, monitoring and evaluation of any emergency health services for • Tracing agencies for those who are unable to locate missing relatives.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 118 Proofread by: Approved by: 4. Orient general health staff and mental health staff in psychological components choices and evaluating the value and consequences of choices; of emergency health care. see also action sheet 4.3 for guidance on organising orientations. Provide half-day or, preferably, one-day orientation seminars to national and international health staff. consider the following contents: • Psycho-education and general information, including: • The importance of treating disaster survivors with respect to protect their dignity; • Basic stress management techniques, including local traditional relaxation techniques; • Non-pharmacological management and referral of medically unexplained somatic complaints, after exclusion of physical causes see Forum for Research and Development reference under Key resources. 5. Make available psychological support for survivors of extreme stressors • Basic information on what is known about the mental health and psychosocial also known as traumatic stressors. impact of emergencies see chapter 1, including understanding of local psychosocial responses to an emergency; • Key conclusions drawn from local mental health and psychosocial support assessments see action sheet 2.1; • avoiding inappropriate pathologising/medicalisation i.e. distinguishing non-pathological distress from mental disorders requiring clinical treatment and/or referral; • Most individuals experiencing acute mental distress following exposure to extremely stressful events are best supported without medication. all aid workers, and especially health workers, should be able to provide very basic psychological first aid PFa. PFa is often mistakenly seen as a clinical or emergency psychiatric intervention. Rather, it is a description of a humane, supportive response to a fellow human being who is suffering and who may need support. PFa is very different from psychological debriefing in that it does not necessarily involve a discussion • Knowledge of any available mental health care in the region to enable of the event that caused the distress. PFa encompasses: appropriate referral for people with severe mental disorders see action sheet 6.2; • Knowledge of locally available social supports and protection mechanisms in the community to enable appropriate referrals see action sheets 5.2 and 3.2; • communicating to patients, giving clear and accurate information on their health status and on relevant services such as family tracing. a refresher on communicating in a supportive manner could include: • active listening; • Basic knowledge on how to deliver bad news in a supportive manner; • Basic knowledge on how to deal with angry, very anxious, suicidal, psychotic or withdrawn patients; • Basic knowledge on how to respond to the sharing of extremely private and emotional events, such as sexual violence; • How to support problem management and empowerment by helping people to clarify their problems, brainstorming together on ways of coping, identifying • Protecting from further harm in rare situations, very distressed persons may take decisions that put them at further risk of harm. Where appropriate, inform distressed survivors of their right to refuse to discuss the events with other aid workers or with journalists; • Providing the opportunity for survivors to talk about the events, but without pressure. Respect the wish not to talk and avoid pushing for more information than the person may be ready to give; • Listening patiently in an accepting and non-judgemental manner; • conveying genuine compassion; • Identifying basic practical needs and ensuring that these are met; • asking for people’s concerns and trying to address these; • Discouraging negative ways of coping specifically discouraging coping through use of alcohol and other substances, explaining that people in severe distress are at much higher risk of developing substance use problems; • Encouraging participation in normal daily routines if possible and use of positive means of coping e.g. culturally appropriate relaxation methods,  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 120 Proofread by: Approved by: accessing helpful cultural and spiritual supports; Key resources • Encouraging, but not forcing, company from one or more family member 1. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP or friends; 2003. Participation and health programmes. In: Participation by Crisis-Affected Populations in • as appropriate, offering the possibility to return for further support; • as appropriate, referring to locally available support mechanisms see action sheet 5.2 or to trained clinicians. Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners, pp.315-330. 2. Forum for Research and Development 2006. Management of Patients with Medically Unexplained Symptoms: Guidelines Poster. Colombo: Forum for Research and Development. • In a minority of cases, when severe acute distress limits basic functioning, clinical treatment will probably be needed for guidance, see Where There is No Psychiatrist under Key resources. If possible, refer the patient to a clinician trained and supervised in helping people with mental disorders see action sheet 6.2. clinical treatment should be provided in combination with other formal or non-formal supports see action sheet 5.2. 3. Médecins Sans Frontières 2005. Mental Health Guidelines. Amsterdam: MSF. 4. National Child Traumatic Stress Network and National Center for PTSD 2006. Psychological First Aid: Field Operations Guide Second edition. 2ndEditionwithappendices.pdf A potential limitation of this resource is that it was specifically • With regards to clinical treatment of acute distress, benzodiazepines are greatly developed for Western disaster settings. The guide describes an advanced form of psychological first over-prescribed in most emergencies. However, this medication may be aid because it was developed for use by previously trained mental health professionals. appropriately prescribed for a very short time for certain specific clinical problems 5. Patel V. 2003. Where There is No Psychiatrist. A Mental Health Care Manual. The Royal College e.g. severe insomnia. Nevertheless, caution is required as use of benzodiazepines of Psychiatrists. may sometimes quickly lead to dependence, especially among very distressed 6. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. persons. also, various experts have argued that benzodiazepines may slow down Minimum Standards in Health Services, pp.249-312. Geneva: Sphere Project. the recovery process after exposure to extreme stressors. • In most cases, acute distress will decrease naturally, without outside intervention, 7. WHO/UNHCR/UNFPA 2004. Clinical Management of Survivors of Rape: Developing protocols for use over time. However, in a minority of cases, a chronic mood or anxiety disorder with refugees and internally displaced persons revised edition. Geneva: WHO/UNHCR. including severe post-traumatic stress disorder will develop. If the disorder is severe, then it should be treated by a trained clinician as part of the minimum emergency response see action sheet 6.2. If the disorder is not severe e.g. the Sample process indicators person is able to function and tolerate the suffering, then the person should receive appropriate care as part of a more comprehensive aid response. Where appropriate, support for these cases may be given by trained and clinically supervised community health workers e.g. social workers, counsellors attached to health services. 6. Collect data on mental health in PHC settings. all PHc staff should document mental health problems in their morbidity data using simple, self-explanatory categories see action sheet 6.2, key action 1 for more detailed guidance. • General health staff know how to protect and promote their patients’ rights to dignity through informed consent, confidentiality and privacy. • General health staff are able to give psychological first aid PFa to their patients as part of their care. • General health staff make appropriate referrals to a community social supports outside the health system, b trained and clinically supervised community workers support workers, counsellors attached to health services if available and c clinicians trained and supervised in the clinical care of mental health problems. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 122 Proofread by: Approved by: example: Macedonia, 1999 • Large numbers of Kosovar refugees were accommodated in makeshift camps. community health workers cHWs received a brief training on identifying medically and socially vulnerable cases and where to refer them. Training included basic knowledge on stress management. action sheet 6.2 Provide access to care for people with severe mental disorders domain: Health services Phase: Minimum Response background Mental disorders account for four of the ten leading causes of disability worldwide, • cHWs worked under the supervision of specialist staff in emergency PHc facilities. but mental health is among the most under-resourced areas of health care. Few They were recruited from the local and refugee populations and were responsible countries meet their clinical mental health needs in normal times, let alone in for monitoring, identifying vulnerable people in the camps, referring such people emergencies. Those clinical mental health services that do exist in low- and middle- to medical and social organisations, providing follow-up on medical/mental health income countries tend to be hospital-based in large cities, and are often inaccessible cases outreach and providing information to new arrivals. to the wider population. • Mental health services psychiatric and acute crisis psychological support were attached to the PHc service and addressed referrals from PHc staff. When the emergency stabilised, the cHWs received intense training and supervision and became camp counsellors. It has been projected that in emergencies, on average, the percentage of people with a severe mental disorder e.g. psychosis and severely disabling presentations of mood and anxiety disorders increases by 1 per cent over and above an estimated baseline of 2–3 per cent. In addition, the percentage of people with mild or moderate mental disorders, including most presentations of mood and anxiety disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTsD, may increase by 5–10 per cent above an estimated baseline of 10 per cent see WHO, 2005a under Key resources. In most situations natural recovery over time i.e. healing without outside intervention will occur for many – but not all – survivors with mild and moderate disorders. This action sheet describes the minimum humanitarian response necessary to care for severe mental disorders. although the language used refers mostly to care of severe mental disorders, it should be noted that many of the recommended actions also apply to the care of selected neurological disorders in countries where care for such disorders is the responsibility of mental health workers. The severe disorders covered in this sheet may be pre-existing or emergency-induced and include the following conditions: • Psychoses of all kinds; • severely disabling presentations of mood and anxiety disorders including severely disabling presentations of PTsD; • severe mental disorders due to the use of alcohol or other psychoactive substances see action sheet 6.5 for guidance on problems related to substance use; • severe behavioural and emotional disorders among children and youth;  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 124 Proofread by: Approved by: • severe pre-existing developmental disabilities; • Neuropsychiatric disorders including epilepsy, delirium and dementia and mental disorders resulting from brain injury or other underlying medical conditions e.g. toxic substances, infection, metabolic disease, tumour, degenerative disease; • any other severe mental health problem, including a locally defined severe disorders that do not readily fit established international classification systems see action sheet 6.4 and b risk behaviours commonly associated with mental disorder e.g. suicidal feelings, self-harm behaviour. People with mental disorders may initially present at primary health care PHc facilities to seek help for medically unexplained somatic complaints. However, people with severe mental disorders may fail to present at all because of isolation, stigma, fear, self-neglect, disability or poor access. These people are doubly vulnerable, both because of their severe disorder and because the emergency may deprive them of social supports that had previously sustained them. Families are often stressed and stigmatised by the burden of care in normal times. This puts such individuals at an outside organisations should provide emergency mental health services. However, services need to be established in such a way that they do not displace existing social and informal means of healing and coping, and in such a way that they can be integrated with government-run health services at a later date. Key actions 1. Assess. Determine what assessments have been done and what information is available. Design, as needed, further assessments. For guidance on the assessment process and what needs to be assessed, see action sheet 2.1. With relevance to the current action sheet, it is important in particular to: • Determine pre-existing structures, locations, staffing and resources for mental health care in the health sector including policies, availability of medications, role of primary health care and mental hospitals, etc. and relevant social services see WHO Mental Health atlas for data on formal mental health care resources in all countries of the world; elevated risk of abandonment in emergencies that involve displacement. Once they are • Determine the impact of the emergency on pre-existing services; identified, however, steps can be taken to provide immediate protection and relief, and to support existing carers. Priority should be given to those at major survival risk or who are living in settings where their dignity and human rights are being undermined, or where social supports are weak and where family members are struggling to cope. Treatment and support of people with severe mental disorders typically requires a combination of biological, social and psychological interventions. Both under-treating and over-medicalisation can be avoided through staff training and supervision. Typically, people suffering from disaster-induced, sub-clinical distress should not receive medication but will respond well to psychological first aid see action sheet 6.1 and to individual and community social support see action sheet 5.2. Moreover, some mental disorders can be effectively treated by practical • Determine if local authorities and communities plan to address the needs of people with severe mental disorders who are affected by the emergency, and determine what may be done and what supports may be needed; • Identify people with severe mental disorders requiring assistance by: • asking all relevant government and non-government agencies particularly those covering health, shelter, camp management and protection and community leaders to alert health care providers when they encounter or are informed about people who seem very confused or disorientated, are incoherent, have strange ideas, behave oddly or appear unable to care for themselves, and to register such people; psychological interventions alone, and medication should not be used unless such • Visiting and, where appropriate, collaborating with existing traditional healers. interventions have failed. They are often well informed as to the location of sufferers and may provide While the actions outlined below are the minimum response necessary to cultural information to non-local practitioners see action sheet 6.4; address the needs of people with severe mental disorders in emergencies, they can also provide the first steps in a more comprehensive response. They are addressed to local health authorities, local health care workers and local and international medical organisations. If at the outset there is no local health infrastructure or local capacity, • Visiting any formal or informal institutions to assess needs and to ensure the basic rights of those in care see action sheet 6.3; • Teaching national and international PHc staff to document mental health problems in PHc data, using simple categories that require little instruction for  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 126 Proofread by: Approved by: recognition. For example, the average primary health worker will require little the rational use of psychotropics, into normal practice and to give it dedicated time additional training in use of the following four categories: see key action 4 below and action sheet 4.3; • • • Medically unexplained somatic complaints • Training and supervising one member of the local PHc team a doctor or a nurse severe emotional distress e.g. signs of severe grief or severe stress severe abnormal behaviour described on the PHc form in locally to provide full-time mental health care alongside the other PHc services see key action 4 below and action sheet 4.3. understood terms for ‘madness’ • alcohol and substance abuse. • share results of assessments with the mental health and psychosocial coordination group see action sheets 1.1 and 2.1 and with the overall health sector coordination group. 2. Ensure adequate supplies of essential psychiatric drugs in all emergency drug kits. • The minimum provision is one generic anti-psychotic, one anti-Parkinsonian drug to deal with potential extra-pyramidal side effects, one anti-convulsant/anti- epileptic, one anti-depressant and one anxiolytic for use with severe substance 4. Train and supervise available PHC staff in the frontline care of severe mental disorder see also action sheet 4.3. • Training should involve both theory and practice and can be begun at the outset of the emergency by a national or international mental health supervisor working in collaboration with local health authorities. This training should continue beyond the emergency as part of a more comprehensive response. Training should include all skills mentioned in key action 4 of action sheet 6.1 plus: • Treating all service users and their care-givers with dignity and respect; • The mental status examination; abuse and convulsions, all in tablet form, from the WHO Model List of Essential • Recognition and frontline management of all the severe disorders listed in the Medicines. background section above; • The Interagency Emergency Health Kit does not include a an anti- • The provision of guidelines and protocols for the above see Key resources; psychotic in tablet form, b an anxiolytic in tablet form, c an anti-Parkinsonian nor d an anti-depressant. arrangements for either purchasing these four drugs locally or importing them will be necessary if this kit is used. • Overall, generic medicines from the WHO Model List are recommended, because they tend to be as effective as branded, newly-developed drugs but are much cheaper, and thus enhance sustainable programming. 3. Enable at least one member of the emergency PHC team to provide frontline mental health care. Possible mechanisms for making this happen include: • National or international mental health professionals attaching themselves to government and/or NGO PHc teams. International workers need to be oriented to local culture and conditions see action sheets 4.3 and 6.1, and should work with competent translators; • Training and supervising local PHc staff to integrate mental health care, including • Time management skills, focusing on how to integrate mental health work into normal clinical work; • simple practical psychological interventions, as covered in Where There is No Psychiatrist see Key resources; • Keeping proper clinical records. Give copies to care-givers if possible, as the population may be mobile; • Maintaining confidentiality. When confidentiality must be broken for protection reasons, address guardianship and medico-legal issues and inform service users and care-givers; • setting up appropriate lines of referral to supports in the community see action sheets 5.2 and 6.4 and to secondary and tertiary services if they exist and are accessible. • For personnel authorised to use medication in the affected country, good prescribing practices include:  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 128 Proofread by: Approved by: • Rational use of essential psychiatric drugs in emergency kits, according to 6. Establish mental health care at additional, logical points of access. the guidelines in Essential Drugs in Psychiatry and consistent with Where Use general public health criteria e.g. population coverage, expected caseload of There is No Psychiatrist see Key resources; service users with severe disorders, potential sustainability of services to determine • How to facilitate continuing access and adherence to prescribed medication for people with chronic disorders e.g. chronic psychosis, epilepsy; • How to avoid prescribing psychotropics to people with disaster-induced, non-pathological distress see action sheet 6.1 by developing non- where to establish mental health care. Mobile PHc or community mental health teams may be an effective way of establishing emergency care at different places within an area. Examples of logical points of access are: • Emergency rooms; pharmacological strategies for stress management; • Outpatient clinics at secondary and tertiary facilities; • How to avoid prescribing placebo medications for medically unexplained • Mental health drop-in centres; somatic complaints; • Understanding both the risks and benefits of benzodiazepines, particularly the risk of dependence from long-term prescribing; • How to minimise the unnecessary prescription of multiple medications. • The management of and support for persons with severe mental disorders who have been chained or physically restrained by care-givers involves the following steps: • General hospital wards with a high number of emergency-related hospitalisations; • Home visits including visits to tents, collection centres, barracks or any temporary housing location; • schools and child-friendly spaces. 7. Try to avoid the creation of parallel mental health services focused on specific • First, facilitate very basic means of psychiatric and social care e.g. the provision diagnoses e.g. PTSD or on narrow groups e.g. widows. This may result in of appropriate medication, family education and support. fragmented, unsustainable services and the continuing neglect of people who do not • Promote humane living conditions. • second, consider untying the person. However, in those rare instances where the person has a history of violent behaviour, ensure basic security for others before doing so. fit the specific diagnostic category or group. It may also contribute to the labelling and stigmatisation of those who do. This does not preclude targeted outreach to broad populations such as outreach clinics for children at schools as part of an integrated service. 5. Avoid overburdening PHC workers with multiple, different training sessions. • Trainees should have time to integrate mental health training into their daily practice so that they can deliver mental health care. • Trainees should not be trained in numerous different skill areas e.g. mental health, TB, malaria, HIV counselling without planning how these skills will be integrated and used. • Theoretical training in short courses is insufficient and may result in harmful interventions. It must always be followed up with extensive on-the-job supervision see action sheet 4.3 and example on page 131. 8. Inform the population about the availability of mental health care. • advertise using relevant information sources, such as radio see action sheet 8.1. • Ensure that all messages are delivered in a sensitive manner that does not result in people viewing normal behaviours and responses to stress as indicative of severe mental disorder. • Inform the community leadership and, if appropriate, local police of the availability of mental health care. 9. Work with local community structures, to discover, visit and assist people with severe mental disorders see action sheets 5.2 and 6.4.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 130 Proofread by: Approved by: 10. Be involved in all inter-agency coordination on mental health see action sheet 1.1. Engage in strategic longer-term planning processes for mental health services. Emergencies are frequently catalysts for mental health reforms, and improvements can occur rapidly. Key resources 1. Forum for Research and Development. 2006. Management of Patients with Medically Unexplained Symptoms: Guidelines Poster. Colombo: Forum for Research and Development. 2. Médecins Sans Frontières 2005. ‘Individual treatment and support’. In Mental Health Guidelines, pp. 40-51. Amsterdam: MSF. Sample process indicators • Number of PHc workers trained and supervised, number of training hours, number of on-the-job supervision sessions. • Essential psychotropic medications in each therapeutic category anti-psychotic, anti-Parkinsonian, anti-depressant, anxiolytic, anti-epileptic are purchased and sustainable supply lines are established. • Number and types of mental health problems seen in PHc clinics and other mental health services. • Number of referrals made to specialised mental health care. example: Aceh, Indonesia, 2005 • an international NGO initiated emergency mental health care in PHc after discussion with relevant authorities, coordination bodies and national and international organisations. • National PHc staff working from fixed and mobile clinics received mental health training and supervision. a trained and supervised national nurse was added to each PHc team to run a mental health service. six months’ training was needed to enable staff to work unsupervised. Training and supervision continued for a year after the acute phase of the emergency. • The NGO engaged in the province’s strategic mental health planning. subsequently, the province’s mental health strategy included the model of training mental health nurses to be attached to PHc facilities. 3. Patel V. 2003. Where There is No Psychiatrist. A Mental Health Care Manual. The Royal College of Psychiatrists. 4. WHO 1993. Essential Drugs in Psychiatry. 5. WHO/UNHCR 1996. ‘Common mental disorders’. In Mental Health of Refugees, pp.39-61. Geneva: WHO/UNHCR. 6. WHO 1998. Mental Disorders in Primary Care: A WHO Educational Package. Geneva: WHO. 7. WHO 2001. The Effectiveness of Mental Health Services in Primary Care: View from the Developing World. Geneva: WHO. 8. WHO 2003, Mental Health in Emergencies: Mental and Social Aspects of Health of Populations Exposed to Extreme Stressors. Geneva: WHO. 9. WHO 2005a. Mental Health Assistance to the Populations Affected by the Tsunami in Asia. 10. WHO 2005b. Mental Health Atlas. Geneva: WHO. 11. WHO 2005c. Model List of Essential Medicines. Geneva: WHO. www.who.int/medicines/publications/essentialmedicines/en/ 12. WHO 2006. The Interagency Emergency Health Kit: Medicines and Medical Devices for 10,000 People for Approximately 3 Months. Geneva: WHO. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 132 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 6.3 Protect and care for people with severe mental disorders and other mental and neurological disabilities living in institutions domain: Health services Phase: Minimum Response background People living in institutions are among the most vulnerable people in society, and they are especially at risk in emergencies. The chaos of the emergency environment adds to their general vulnerability. People in institutions may be abandoned by staff and left unprotected from the effects of natural disaster or conflict. severe mental disorder is often met with stigma and prejudice, resulting in neglect, abandonment and human rights violations. Living in an institution isolates people from potential family protection and support, which may be essential for survival in emergencies. some people with severe mental disorders living in institutions healers see also action sheet 6.4. Key actions 1. Ensure that at least one agency involved in health care accepts responsibility for ongoing care and protection of people in institutions. • The primary responsibility for this lies with the government, but the mental health and psychosocial support coordination group see action sheet 1.1 and the health coordinating group/Health cluster should help identify a health agency if there is a gap in response. • Emergency action plans should be developed for institutions in line with key actions 2–4 below. If these plans have not been developed before the emergency, then they should be developed during the emergency, as appropriate. are too dependent on institutionalised care to easily go elsewhere during an 2. If staff have abandoned psychiatric institutions, mobilise human resources from emergency. Total dependency on institutional care may create further anxiety, agitation the community and the health system to care for people with severe mental disorders or complete withdrawal. Difficulties in reacting adequately to the fast-changing who have been abandoned. When the condition of the patient allows, care should be emergency environment may limit self-protection and survival mechanisms. provided outside the institution. Local professionals should lead the emergency response whenever possible. • Discuss with community leaders the responsibilities of the community in providing Intervention must focus on protection and the re-establishment of basic pre-existing care. Basic care and dignity includes appropriate clothing, feeding, shelter, sanitation, physical care and basic treatment including medication and psychosocial support. attention should be given to pre-existing levels of care that fall below medical and human rights standards. In such cases, the emergency intervention should focus not on re-instituting pre-existing care but on meeting general minimum standards and practices for psychiatric care. In most countries, as soon as the worst phase of the emergency a supportive and protective network. The following groups may be mobilised: • Health professionals and, if possible, mental health professionals; • When appropriate, local non-allopathic health care providers e.g. religious leaders, traditional healers: see action sheet 6.4; • social workers and other community-based mechanisms e.g. women’s groups, mental health consumer organisations; is over, sound intervention involves developing community mental health services. • Family members. This action sheet focuses mostly on the emergency-related needs of people with mental disorders living in psychiatric institutions. It should be noted, however, that typically these institutions hold not only people with severe mental disorders but often also people with other chronic and severe mental and neurological disabilities, to whom this action sheet also applies. In addition, many of the same needs and recommended actions in this sheet apply to people who have severe mental disorders or other mental and neurological disabilities and who live in prisons, social welfare institutions and other residential institutions, including institutions run by traditional • Provide basic training on topics such as ethical use of restraint protocols, crisis including aggression management, ongoing care and simple ways to improve patients’ self-management. • Ensure ongoing, close supervision of those mobilised to provide basic care and provide access to information on how to maintain their own emotional health see action sheet 8.2.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 134 Proofread by: Approved by: 3. Protect the lives and dignity of people living in psychiatric institutions. Key resources • Protect patients against self-harm or abuse by others e.g. visitors, staff, other 1. WHO 2003. ‘Custodial hospitals in conflict situations’. Geneva: WHO. patients, looters, fighting factions. address issues of sexual violence, abuse, exploitation e.g. trafficking, forced labour and other violations of human rights 2. WHO 2003–2006. WHO Mental Health Policy and Services Guidance Package. Geneva: WHO. at appropriate levels see action sheets 3.1 and 3.3. This package is relevant for comprehensive, • Ensure that patients’ basic physical needs are met. These basic needs include potable water, hygiene, adequate food, shelter and sanitation, and access to treatment for physical disorders. • Monitor the overall health status of patients and implement or strengthen human rights surveillance. This should be done by external review bodies if available, post-emergency response. In particular, see the module ‘Organisation of Services for Mental Health’. 3. WHO/ICRC 2005. ‘Mental health in prisons: Information sheet’. Geneva: WHO/ICRC. human rights organisations or protection specialists. Sample process indicators • Ensure that evacuation plans exist for patients in or outside facilities and that staff are trained on evacuation procedures. If the institution contains locked facilities • The basic physical needs of people in psychiatric institutions continue to be addressed. or cells, establish a hierarchy of responsibilities for keys to ensure that doors can • People in psychiatric institutions continue to receive basic health and be unlocked at any time. mental health care. • If an evacuation occurs, keep patients with their families as far as possible. If this • Human rights for those in psychiatric institutions are monitored and respected. is not possible, keep families and carers informed of where people are being moved. • Proper evacuation and emergency plans are in place. Keep records of this. example: Sierra leone, 1999 4. Enable basic health and mental health care throughout the emergency. • In the midst of conflict, all staff at a psychiatric institution had left, except for two • Perform regular medical physical and psychiatric examinations. • Provide treatment for physical disorders. • Provide ongoing basic mental health care: • Ensure that essential medications, including psychotropics, are available in sufficient quantities throughout the emergency. sudden discontinuation of psychotropics can be harmful and dangerous. Ensure that drugs are rationally prescribed by evaluating medication prescriptions regularly at least weekly. • Ensure safe storage of drugs. • Facilitate the availability of psychosocial supports. • Though physical restraint and isolation are strongly discouraged, these conditions frequently occur in many institutions. Implement a protocol regulating frequent inspections, feeding, treatment and regular evaluation of the necessity of separations. psychiatric nurses. The building was partly damaged and patients were wandering in the community, some returning for the night to sleep. Patients were being used to run errands through the frontline and to smuggle food. • community leaders were gathered to discuss the situation. The community agreed to help identify patients, with guidance from the two remaining psychiatric nurses. a regular food supply to both the community and the institution was arranged. • an international medical NGO supported the medical screening of patients and secured supplies of medicines. • Family members of patients were approached to help support them, under the supervision of the psychiatric nurses and the NGO’s health staff. • some basic reconstruction was done and an emergency plan was prepared in case the institution came under subsequent attack.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 136 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 6.4 Learn about and, where appropriate, collaborate with local, indigenous and traditional healing systems domain: Health services Phase: Minimum Response background fasting, cutting, prolonged physical restraint or social cleansing rituals that involve the expulsion of ‘witches’ from the community. In addition some rituals are extremely costly, and in the past some healers have used emergencies to proselytise and exploit vulnerable populations. The challenge in such cases is to find effective, constructive ways of addressing harmful practices, as far as is realistic in an emergency allopathic mental health care a term used here to mean conventional Western, environment. Before supporting or collaborating with traditional cleansing or healing biomedical mental health care tends to centre on hospitals, clinics and, increasingly, practices, it is essential to determine what those practices involve and whether they are communities. It is provided by staff trained in medicine, behavioural sciences and potentially beneficial, harmful or neutral. formal psychotherapy or social work. However, all societies include non-allopathic Whether or not traditional healing approaches are clinically effective, dialogues i.e. local, informal, traditional, indigenous, complementary or alternative healing with traditional healers can lead to positive outcomes, such as: systems of health care that may be significant. For example in India, ayurveda, a traditional system of medicine, is popular and well developed including medical colleges to train practitioners, while in south africa traditional healers are legally recognised. In Western societies, many people use complementary medicines, including unorthodox psychotherapies and other treatments e.g. acupuncture, homeopathy, faith-based healing, self-medication of all kinds in spite of a very weak scientific • Increased understanding of the way emotional distress and psychiatric illness is expressed and addressed see action sheet 2.1 and a more comprehensive picture of the type and level of distress in the affected population; • Improved referral systems; • continuing relationships with healers to whom many people turn for help; evidence base. In many rural communities in low-income societies, informal and • Increased understanding of beneficiaries’ spiritual, psychological and social worlds; traditional systems may be the main method of health care provision. • Greater acceptance by survivors of new services; Even when allopathic health services are available, local populations may prefer to turn to local and traditional help for mental and physical health issues. such help may be cheaper, more accessible, more socially acceptable and less stigmatising and, in some cases, may be potentially effective. It often uses models of causation that are locally understood. such practices include healing by religious leaders using prayer or recitation; specialised healers sanctioned by the religious community using similar • Identifying opportunities for potential collaborative efforts in healing and thus increasing the number of potentially effective treatments available to the population; • Establishing allopathic services that may be more culturally appropriate; • The potential opportunity to monitor and address any human rights abuses occurring within traditional systems of care. methods; or healing by specialised healers operating within the local cultural some traditional healers may seek a physical and symbolic ‘distance’ from allopathic framework. The latter may involve the use of herbs or other natural substances, practitioners, and may avoid collaboration. at the same time, health staff trained in massage or other physical manipulation, rituals and/or magic, as well as rituals dealing allopathic medicine may be unsympathetic or hostile to traditional practices, or may with spirits. be ignorant of them. although in some situations keeping a distance may be the best although some religious leaders may not sanction or may actively proscribe option, the key actions outlined in this action sheet may be used to facilitate a such practices, such local healers are often popular and sometimes successful. In some constructive bridge between different systems of care. cultures such beliefs and practices are blended with those of a major religion. In addition, local pharmacies may provide health care by dispensing both allopathic and indigenous medications. some religious groups may offer faith-based healing. It should be noted that some traditional healing practices are harmful. They may, for example, include the provision of false information, beatings, prolonged Key actions 1. Assess and map the provision of care. Identify key local healing systems and their significance, acceptance and role in the community. Information may not be immediately volunteered when people fear  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 138 Proofread by: Approved by: disapproval from outsiders or consider the practices to be secret or accessible only to • share results of assessments with the coordination group see action sheets 1.1 those sanctioned by the community. International and national ‘outsiders’ should take and 2.1. a non-judgmental, respectful approach that emphasises interest in understanding local religious and spiritual beliefs and potential cooperation with the local way of working. 2. Learn about national policy regarding traditional healers. Emergencies should never be used to promote outsiders’ religious or spiritual beliefs. Recognise that: • ask local community representatives of both genders where they go for help with • some governments and/or medical authorities discourage or ban health care difficulties and to whom they turn for support. providers from collaborating with traditional healers; • ask primary health care providers and midwives what traditional systems exist. • Other governments encourage collaboration and have special departments engaged • Visit local pharmacies to assess what drugs and remedies are available and how in the formal training of healers, as well as in research and evaluation of traditional dispensing takes place. medicine. such a department may be a useful resource. • ask people seeking help at health service points how they understand the nature and origin of their problems, and who else they see or have seen previously for 3. Establish rapport with identified healers. assistance. • Visit the healer, preferably in the company of a trusted intermediary former patient, • ask local religious leaders whether they provide healing services and who else in the sympathetic religious leader, local authority such as a mayor, or friend. community does so. • Introduce oneself; explain one’s role and desire to assist the community. • ask any of the above if they will provide an introduction to local healers and set up • show respect for the healer’s role and ask if they might explain their work and how a meeting. • Remember that more than one system of informal care may exist, and that practitioners in one system may not acknowledge or discuss others. • Be aware that local healers may compete over ‘patients’ or be in conflict over the appropriate approach. This means that the above processes may need frequent repetition. • Talk with local anthropologists/sociologists/those with knowledge of local beliefs this has been affected by the emergency e.g. are there increased numbers of patients, or difficulties carrying out work because of a lack of necessary materials or the loss of facilities?. some healers may be concerned about revealing details of their methods, and it will take time to establish trust. • If appropriate, emphasise interest in establishing a cooperative relationship and a mutual exchange of ideas. and customs and read the available relevant literature. 4. Encourage the participation of local healers in information sharing and • Observe. ask permission to watch a treatment session, and visit local shrines or training sessions. religious sites used for healing. There may be informal systems of institutional care, including those that hold patients in custody see action sheet 6.3. • Visit places of worship that conduct healing sessions, and attend services. • Discuss with patients their understanding of the processes involved in illness and healing. • Determine whether traditional practices include measures that may be harmful or unacceptable. • Invite healers to community information meetings and training sessions. • consider giving healers a role in training, e.g. by explaining their understanding of how illness is caused or their definitions of illness. On occasions when this is incompatible with the approach of local or international organisations involved in the emergency response, an understanding of local healers’ models is still essential to good patient care as it may underpin the patient’s own understanding of their problem.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 140 Proofread by: Approved by: • Try to find points of mutual agreement and discuss opportunities for cross-referral see key action 5 below. 5. WHO 2003. Traditional Medicine: Fact Sheet. • Be aware that many traditional healers in many countries may not read or write. 6. WHO 2006. Traditional Medicine. 5. If possible, set up collaborative services. Sample process indicators • active collaboration as opposed to simply exchanging information as described • assessments of key local healing systems have been conducted and shared with above is useful if: relevant aid coordination bodies. • Traditional systems play a significant role for the majority of the population; • Non-allopathic healers are given a role in mental health training sessions when • The systems are not harmful. However, in the case of harmful practices, a constructive dialogue is still required for the purposes of education and change. appropriate in the local context. • Number of non-allopathic healers attending mental health training sessions. • Useful forms of collaboration could include: • Invitations to consultations; • cross-referral for example, problems such as stress, anxiety, bereavement, conversion reactions and existential distress may potentially be better treated by traditional healers, while allopathic healers are better at treating severe mental disorders and epilepsy; • Joint assessments; • Joint clinics; • shared care: for example, healers may be prepared to learn how to monitor psychotic patients on long-term medication and to provide places for patients to stay while receiving conventional treatment. Traditional relaxation methods and massage can be incorporated into allopathic practice. Key resources 1. Center for World Indigenous Studies. www.cwis.org 2. International Psychiatry, Vol 8, 2005, pp.2-9. Thematic papers on traditional medicines in psychiatry. 3. Save the Children 2006. The Invention of Child Witches in the Democratic Republic of Congo: Social Cleansing, Religious Commerce And The Difficulties Of Being A Parent In An Urban Culture. 4. WHO/UNHCR 1996. ‘Traditional medicine and traditional healers’, pp.89-99, Mental Health of Refugees. Geneva: WHO/UNHCR. example: eastern Chad, 2005-06 • an international NGO, providing mental health care within primary health services, worked with traditional healers from the Darfurian population in refugee camps. • NGO staff met healers for discussions in which healers examined the NGO’s credibility. subsequently, healers a explained their difficulties in carrying out work because of the absence of prayer books and herbs; b identified the whereabouts of people with severe mental illness who had been chained; c described their classifications and interventions for people with emotional problems or mental illness; and d explained that most refugees sought traditional and allopathic health care concurrently. • Training seminars were organised in which knowledge and skills were exchanged. Over a period of six months, healers met regularly with NGO staff for discussions that included mutual exchanges of understanding on female circumcision, medical aspects of fasting, nutrition and breastfeeding, emotional stress, trauma and post- traumatic reactions, serious mental disorders, learning disabilities and epilepsy. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 142 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 6.5 Minimise harm related to alcohol and other substance use domain: Health services Phase: Minimum Response background conflict and natural disasters create situations in which people may experience severe problems related to alcohol and other substance use aOsU. These include far- reaching protection, psychosocial, mental health, medical and socio-economic problems. • aOsU may increase among emergency-affected populations as people attempt to cope with stress. This may lead to harmful use or dependence. • communities have difficulties recovering from the effects of emergencies when: • as part of further assessments, identify commonly used substances; harms associated with their use; factors promoting or limiting these harms; and the impact of disruption caused by the emergency to supply, equipment and interventions see box on pages 145–146. • Reassess the situation at regular intervals. Problems associated with aOsU may change with time, as changes occur in the availability of substances and/or financial resources. • share results of assessments with the relevant coordination groups. 2. Prevent harmful alcohol and other substance use and dependence. • Informed by all assessment information see also action sheet 2.1, advocate for • aOsU inhibits individuals and communities from addressing problems; implementing a multi-sectoral response – e.g. as outlined in the matrix chapter 2 – • Limited resources in families and communities are spent on aOsU; • aOsU is associated with violence, exploitation, neglect of children and other protection threats. • aOsU is associated with risky health behaviour, such as unsafe sex while intoxicated with alcohol, and it promotes transmission of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections. sharing injection equipment is a common means of transmitting HIV and other blood-borne viruses. • Emergencies can disrupt supply of substances and any pre-existing treatment of aOsU problems, causing sudden withdrawal among people dependent on substances. In some cases, particularly with alcohol, such withdrawal can be life- threatening. Moreover, lack of access to commonly available drugs can promote to address relevant underlying stressors for harmful use and dependence. • advocate or facilitate that educational and recreational activities and non-alcohol- related income-generating opportunities are re-established as soon as possible see action sheets 1.1, 5.2 and 7.1. • Engage both men and women from the community in aOsU problem prevention and response see action sheets 5.1 and 5.2, as well as members of any existing self-help groups or associations of ex-users. • Train and supervise health workers, teachers, community workers and other resources in: • Early detection and so-called brief interventions see Key resources 6 and 9 to identify and motivate people at risk of harmful or dependent use to transition to injection drug use as a more efficient route of administration, and may reduce aOsU; promote unsafe injection drug use. • Non-medical approaches to dealing with acute distress psychological first aid: Harm related to aOsU is increasingly recognised as an important public health and see action sheet 6.1. protection issue that requires a multi-sectoral response in emergency settings. • Train and supervise health workers in: Key actions 1. Conduct a rapid assessment. • coordinate assessment efforts. Organise a review of available information on aOsU, and identify a responsible agency or agencies to design and conduct further rapid, participatory assessments as needed see action sheets 1.1 and 2.1. • Rational prescription of benzodiazepines and where available and affordable use of non-addictive medication alternatives; • Detection of hazardous, harmful and dependent aOsU; • Identification, treatment and referral of people with severe mental disorders, who are at elevated risk of aOsU problems see action sheet 6.2.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 144 Proofread by: Approved by: • Discuss aOsU in stress management training of health and other workers see substitution treatment such as with methadone or buprenorphine. action sheet 4.4 and Key resources below for guidance on self-help strategies. • Re-establish pre-existing substitution therapy as soon as possible. • Train and supervise community workers to identify and target at-risk groups for additional support e.g. survivors of violence, families of dependent users, while avoiding setting up a parallel service see action sheets 4.3 and 5.2. 3. Facilitate harm reduction interventions in the community. • Ensure access to and information on the use of condoms at sites where people involved in aOsU congregate such as alcohol sales points in a culturally sensitive manner see iasc Guidelines for HiV/aiDs interventions in Emergency settings. Assessment for alcohol and other substance use AoSu For guidance on assessment methodology, see action sheet 2.1 and Key resources below. Relevant data include: A. Contextual factors and availability of alcohol and other substances • Pre-emergency cultural norms regarding aOsU and the way that this was addressed by the community for displaced and host populations, men and • advocate with responsible authorities and community groups to relocate alcohol women. sales points to minimise disruption to the community. • any available baseline data on aOsU, and other associated psychological, • Provide risk reduction information to targeted groups e.g. concerning injection social and medical problems, including HIV prevalence. drug use, alcohol use or unsafe sex. • Ensure access to and disposal of safe injecting equipment for injection drug users, if indicated by assessment. • Relevant regulatory and legislative frameworks. B. Current patterns and trends in AOSU • conduct aOsU and harm reduction awareness sessions among male and female • availability and approximate cost of most prevalent psychoactive substances, community leaders, as appropriate. For example, in some settings interventions and other supply chain information, including disruption to supply as a result to reduce harm from heavy alcohol use have included teaching safe distillation of the emergency. methods for local brewing, restricting sales hours, requiring payment at the time of serving and agreeing to a ban on weapons on premises where alcohol is sold or consumed. 4. Manage withdrawal and other acute problems. • substances used and method of administration including changing patterns of use such as transition from smoking to injecting, introduction of new substances by sub-groups e.g. age, sex, occupation e.g. farmer, ex-combatant, sex worker, ethnicity, religion. • Develop protocols for clinics and hospitals on the management of withdrawal, C. Problems associated with AOSU intoxication, overdose and other common presentations, as identified in the • associated psychosocial and mental health problems e.g. gender-based assessment. • Train and supervise health workers for the management and referral of withdrawal and other violence, suicide, child abuse or neglect; substance-induced or exacerbated mental and behavioural disorders; discrimination; criminalisation. or other acute presentations, together with provision of sufficient medication, • associated high-risk behaviours e.g. unsafe sexual behaviour and/or injection including benzodiazepines, for alcohol withdrawal. community agencies should practices. train and supervise community workers in the identification, initial management and referral of common acute presentations such as withdrawal. • associated medical problems e.g. transmission of HIV and other blood-borne viruses, overdose events, withdrawal syndromes, particularly life-threatening • In areas where opiate dependence is common, consider establishing low-threshold alcohol withdrawal.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 146 Proofread by: Approved by: • socio-economic problems e.g. households selling essential food and non-food items, drug/alcohol trafficking, drug-related sex trade. D. Existing resources see also action sheet 2.1 • Health, psychosocial and community services including alcohol and other substance abuse services, harm reduction efforts and self-help groups or associations of ex-users, if any. Document disruption to services due to the emergency. Basic services including food, water, shelter. Functioning community and cultural institutions. safe spaces for those at risk of aOsU-related violence if any. Family and community care for those with substance dependence if any. Educational, recreational and employment opportunities if any. • • • • • Key resources 8. WHO 2002. SEX-RAR Guide: The Rapid Assessment and Response Guide on Psychoactive Substance Use and Sexual Risk Behaviour. Geneva: WHO. 9. WHO 2003. Brief Intervention for Substance Use: A Manual for Use in Primary Care. Draft Version 1.1 for Field Testing. Geneva: WHO. 10. WHO 2003. The Alcohol, Smoking And Substance Involvement Screening Test ASSIST: Guidelines for Use in Primary Care. Draft Version 1.1 for Field Testing. Geneva: WHO. 11. WHO 2003. Self-help Strategies for Cutting Down or Stopping Substance Use: A Guide. Draft Version 1.1 for Field Testing. Geneva: WHO. Sample process indicators • a recent assessment of harms related to alcohol and substance use aOsU has been conducted. • condoms are continuously available in areas where people involved in 1. Costigan G., Crofts N. and Reid G. 2003. The Manual for Reducing Drug Related Harm in Asia. aOsU congregate. Melbourne: Centre for Harm Reduction. 2. Inter-Agency Standing Committee 2003. Guidelines for HIV/AIDS Interventions in Emergency Settings. 7.3 Provide condoms and establish condom supply, 7.5. Ensure IDU appropriate care, pp.68-70, pp.76-79. Geneva: IASC. 3. Patel V. 2003. Where There is No Psychiatrist. A Mental Health Care Manual. The Royal College of Psychiatrists. 4. WHO/UNHCR 1996. ‘Alcohol and other drug problems’. In Mental Health of Refugees, pp.101-109. Geneva: WHO/UNHCR. 5. WHO 1998. Rapid Assessment and Response Guide on Injecting Drug Use IDU-RAR. Geneva: WHO. 6. WHO 2001. Brief Intervention for Hazardous and Harmful Drinking: A Manual for Use in Primary Care. Geneva: WHO. 7. WHO 2001. What Do People Think They Know of Substance Dependence: Myths and Facts. Geneva: WHO. • Estimated proportion of health workers that have been trained to conduct brief interventions for aOsU. example: bam, Iran, 2003–04 • an earthquake occurred in an area where opiate dependence was known to be prevalent. Informally, the government immediately contacted all of the country’s hospitals recommending that addicted survivors who had been evacuated received substitution therapy when clinically indicated. • Ten days later, Iranian researchers conducted an assessment of the substance use situation at the request of the Ministry of Health. • The assessment confirmed that the earthquake had disrupted supplies to a large number of opiate-dependent men, triggering opiate withdrawal. • standard treatment protocols for health facilities for pain management in opiate dependence, clinical management of withdrawal and low-dose substitution therapy were made available.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 148 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 7.1 strengthen access to safe and supportive education domain: Education Phase: Minimum Response Key actions 1. Promote safe learning environments. Education serves an important protection role by providing a forum for disseminating messages on and skills in protection within a violence-free environment. Immediate background steps include the following: In emergencies, education is a key psychosocial intervention: it provides a safe and stable environment for learners and restores a sense of normalcy, dignity and hope by offering structured, appropriate and supportive activities. Many children and parents regard participation in education as a foundation of a successful childhood. Well-designed education also helps the affected population to cope with their situation by disseminating key survival messages, enabling learning about self-protection and supporting local people’s strategies to address emergency conditions. It is important to restart non-formal and formal educational activities immediately, prioritising the safety and well-being of all children and youth, including those who are at increased risk see chapter 1 or who have special education needs. • assess needs and capacities for formal and non-formal education, considering protection issues, as well as how to integrate and support local initiatives. Formal and non-formal education should be complementary and should be established concurrently where possible. • Maximise the participation of the affected community, including parents, and of appropriate education authorities e.g. education ministry officials if possible in assessing, planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating the education programme. • Evaluate safety issues in the location and design of spaces, learning structures or Loss of education is often among the greatest stressors for learners and their schools: families, who see education as a path toward a better future. Education can be an • Locate schools away from military zones or installations; essential tool in helping communities to rebuild their lives. access to formal and non- • Place schools close to population centres; formal education in a supportive environment builds learners’ intellectual and emotional competencies, provides social support through interaction with peers and educators and strengthens learners’ sense of control and self-worth. It also builds life skills that strengthen coping strategies, facilitate future employment and reduce economic stress. all education responses in an emergency should aim to help achieve the iNEE Minimum standards for Education in Emergencies, chronic crises and • Provide separate male and female latrines in safe places. • Monitor safe conditions in and around the learning spaces/schools e.g. by identifying a focal point in the school and respond to threats to learners from armed conflict. • Make learning spaces/schools zones of peace: Early Reconstruction see Key resources. • advocate with armed groups to avoid targeting and recruiting in learning Educators – formal classroom teachers, instructors of non-formal learning and spaces/schools; facilitators of educational activities – have a crucial role to play in supporting the mental health and psychosocial well-being of learners. Far too often, educators struggle to overcome the challenges that they and their learners face, including their own emergency-related mental health and psychosocial problems. Training, supervision and support for these educators enable a clear understanding of their roles in promoting learners’ well-being and help them to protect and foster the development of children, youth and adult learners throughout the emergency. • Ban arms from learning spaces and schools; • Provide escorts to children when travelling to or from education activities/ school. • Identify key protection threats external to the educational system e.g. armed conflict and those that are internal e.g. bullying, violent punishment: • Identify key protection threats from within the educational system such as gender-based violence GBV, child recruitment or violence in educational settings;  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 150 Proofread by: Approved by: • Incorporate messages on how to prevent and respond to these and other that use locally available materials. protection issues such as separated children and community-based protection measures: see action sheet 3.2 in the learning process; • Include life skills training and provision of information about the emergency. Life skills and learning content that may be particularly relevant in emergencies includes • set up education/protection monitoring efforts of individual children to hygiene promotion, non-violent conflict resolution, interpersonal skills, prevention identify and support the learners at risk of or experiencing protection threats; of GBV, prevention of sexually transmitted diseases e.g. HIV/aIDs, mine or • Use the iasc Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence interventions in Humanitarian settings to prevent GBV in and around learning spaces and schools. • Rapidly organise informal education such as child- and youth-friendly spaces centres d’animation or informal community-based educational groups. community members, humanitarian aid workers and educators may help organise these without physical infrastructure such as centres while the formal education explosive awareness and information about the current situation e.g. earthquakes, armed conflicts, etc.. The content and facilitation of life skills training should be informed by a risks assessment and by prioritisation of need. • Utilise participatory methods that involve community representatives and learners in learning activities. adolescent and youth participation in conducting activities for younger children is particularly valuable. Peer-to-peer approaches should also be considered. system is being reestablished or reactivated. The staff of child-friendly spaces • Use education as a mechanism for community mobilisation see action sheet 5.1. should have strong interpersonal skills, the ability to utilise active learning Involve parents in the management of learning and education and engage the approaches and experience of working with non-formal education or community community in the reconstruction of education facilities which may be temporary programmes. a background in formal education is not necessary in these settings. and/or permanent structures. Organise weekly community meetings with child/ 2. Make formal and non-formal education more supportive and relevant. youth/community representatives to facilitate activities that are appropriate to the local context and that utilise local knowledge and skills. supportive, relevant education is important in promoting learners’ mental health • Ensure that any education coordination or working group takes into account and psychosocial well-being during an emergency, while simultaneously promoting mental health/psychosocial considerations. Designate a point person to link effective learning. the mental health/psychosocial coordination group see action sheet 1.1 to the • Make education flexible and responsive to emergency-induced emotional, cognitive education coordination mechanism. and social needs and capacities of learners. For instance, offer shorter activities if • Include opportunities in child- and youth-friendly spaces for children and young learners have difficulty concentrating; establish flexible schedules to avoid undue people to learn life skills and to participate, for example, in supplementary stress on learners, educators and their families by offering variable hours/shifts; education, vocational training, artistic, cultural and environmental activities and/or adapt exam timetables to give learners additional time to prepare. sports. • aim to provide education that helps to restore a sense of structure, predictability • support non-formal learning such as adult education and literacy and vocational and normality for children; creates opportunities for expression, choice, social training to provide learners with skills that are relevant for the current and future interaction and support; and builds children’s competencies and life skills. For economic environments and that are linked to employment opportunities. For instance, establish activity schedules and post these visibly in the education facility/ children under 15, non-formal education should serve as a complement to, not a learning space; avoid punishment of learners whose performance in class suffers substitute for, formal education. due to mental health or psychosocial problems; use collaborative games rather than competitive ones; increase the use of active, expressive learning approaches; use culturally appropriate structured activities such as games, song, dance and drama • Use food-for-education programmes to promote mental health and psychosocial well-being, where appropriate. Providing food on-site or as take-home rations in educational settings can be an effective strategy for increasing attendance and 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 152 Proofread by: Approved by: retention, which in itself contributes to mental health and psychosocial well-being interact with learners, creating a safe and supportive environment in which learners may see action sheet 9.1. In addition, food in education can directly benefit express their emotions and experiences, and by including specific structured psychosocial psychosocial well-being by increasing concentration, reducing social distinctions activities in the teaching/learning process. However, they should not attempt to between ‘rich’ and ‘poor’, etc. The provision of food or feeding programmes in conduct therapy, which requires specialised skills. Providing support for educators’ educational settings should occur only when this can be done efficiently, does not own psychosocial well-being is an essential component of supporting learners. harm the nutritional status of the learners and does not significantly undermine social traditions e.g. the role of the family in providing appropriate nutrition for children. 3. Strengthen access to education for all. • Rapidly increase access to formal and/or non-formal education. This may require creative and flexible approaches, such as opening schools in phases, double-shifting or using alternative sites. • Temporarily ease documentation requirements for admission and be flexible about enrolment. Emergency-affected populations may not have certificates of citizenship, birth/age certificates, identity papers or school reports. age limits should not be enforced for emergency-affected children and youth. • support the specific needs of particular learners e.g. provide child-care services for teenage mothers and siblings tasked with caring for younger children; provide school materials to learners in need. • Make educational spaces accessible to and appropriate for different groups |of children, especially marginalised children e.g. disabled or economically disadvantaged children, or ethnic minorities. Develop separate activities for adolescents and youth, who often receive insufficient attention. • adapt interaction with students by: • Integrating topics related to the emergency in the learning process; • addressing the cause of problem behaviours in the class e.g. aggressiveness; • Helping learners to understand and support one another. • Provide educators with continuous learning opportunities, relevant training and professional support for the emergency, rather than through one-off or short-term training without follow-up see action sheet 4.3. Key topics may include: • Encouraging community participation and creating safe, protective learning environments; • Effects of difficult experiences and situations on the psychosocial well-being and resilience of children, including girls and boys of different ages; ethics of psychosocial support see action sheet 4.2; • Life skills relevant to the emergency see key action 2 above for suggestions; • constructive classroom management methods that explain why corporal punishment should not be used and that provide concrete alternatives to the use of violence; • How to deal constructively with learners’ issues such as anger, fear and grief; • How to conduct structured group activities such as art, cultural activities, • Where appropriate, provide catch-up courses and accelerated learning for older sports, games and skills building; children e.g. those formerly associated with fighting forces or armed groups • How to work with parents and communities; who have missed out on education. • When appropriate, conduct back-to-school campaigns in which communities, • How to utilise referral mechanisms to provide additional support to learners who exhibit severe mental health and psychosocial difficulties see key educational authorities and humanitarian workers promote access for all children action 5 below; and youth to education. 4. Prepare and encourage educators to support learners’ psychosocial well-being. Educators can provide psychosocial support to learners both by adapting the way they • How to develop plans of action for implementing psychosocial support in educators’ work; • Helping educators to better cope with life during and following the emergency, including the effects of stress on educators, coping skills, supportive  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 154 Proofread by: Approved by: supervision and peer group support. • Use participatory learning methods adapted to the local context and culture. Ensure that educators have opportunities to share their own knowledge and experience of local child development and helping practices and to practise new skills. The appropriateness and usefulness of training must be evaluated periodically. Ongoing support, including both professional supervision and materials, should be provided to educators. • activate available psychosocial support for educators. For instance, bring educators together with a skilled facilitator to start talking about the past, present and future, or put in place a community support mechanism to assist educators in dealing with crisis situations. 3. Crisp J., Talbot C. and Cipollone D. eds. 2001. Learning for a Future: Refugee Education in Developing Countries. Geneva: UNHCR. 4. Danish Red Cross 2004. Framework for School-Based Psychosocial Support Programmes: Guidelines for Initiation of Programmes. 2Children-armed/PSPC.Final.Report.pdf 5. IASC 2005. Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings. 6. Inter-Agency Network on Education in Emergencies INEE 2004. INEE Minimum Standards for Education in Emergencies, Chronic Crises and Early Reconstruction. 7. Inter-Agency Network on Education in Emergencies INEE 2005. Promoting INEE Good Practice Guides – Educational Content and Methodology. then the 5. Strengthen the capacity of the education system to support learners experiencing psychosocial and mental health difficulties. following links: • strengthen the capacity of educational institutions to support learners experiencing particular mental health and psychosocial difficulties: 8. Macksoud M. 1993. Helping Children Cope with the Stresses of War: A Manual for Parents and • Designate focal points to monitor and follow up individual children; Teachers. UNICEF. • If school counsellors exist, provide training on dealing with emergency- 9. Nicolai S. 2003. Education in Emergencies: A Tool Kit for Starting and Managing Education in related issues. • Help school staff such as administrators, counsellors, teachers and health workers understand where to refer children with severe mental health and psychosocial difficulties this may include children who are not directly affected by the emergency but who may have pre-existing difficulties to appropriate mental health, social services and psychosocial supports in the community see action sheet 5.2 and to health services, when appropriate see action sheet 6.2, including the criteria for referral of severe mental health problems. Ensure that learners, parents and community members understand how to use this system of referral. Key resources 1. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance ALNAP 2003. Participation by Affected Populations in Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners. Chapter 12, ‘Participation and Education’, pp.331-342. 2. Annan J., Castelli L., Devreux A. and Locatelli E. 2003. Training Manual for Teachers. Emergencies. Save the Children UK. 10. Save the Children 1996. Psychosocial Well-Being Among Children Affected by Armed Conflict and Displacement: Principles and Approaches. Geneva. technical-resources/emergencies-protection/psychosocwellbeing2.pdf 11. Sinclair M. 2002. Planning Education In and After Emergencies. UNESCO: International Institute for Educational Planning IIEP. Sample process indicators • Percentage of learners who have access to formal education. • Non-formal education venues are open and accessible to girls and boys of different ages. • Percentage of teachers trained in and receiving follow-up support on how to support learners’ psychosocial well-being.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 156 Proofread by: Approved by: • Teachers and other educational workers refer children with severe mental health and psychosocial difficulties to available specialised services or supports. example: occupied Palestinian territory, 2001 • In response to the second intifada, the Palestinian National Plan of action for children a body of NGOs and INGOs coordinated the work of national and international organisations to provide safe and supportive formal and non-formal education. • Organisations conducted back-to-school campaigns and supported summer camps and child- and youth-friendly spaces. The education process was revised to be more protective, relevant and supportive by providing greater opportunities for expression and by developing life skills for protection. • Educators were trained to understand and respond to students’ emotional and behavioural needs; youth-led mentoring programmes for adolescents were introduced; and structured psychosocial sessions were introduced in the schools. action sheet 8.1 Provide information to the affected population on the emergency, relief efforts and their legal rights domain: Dissemination of information Phase: Minimum Response background In addition to lives and health, truth and justice often become casualties in emergency situations. Emergencies tend to destabilise conventional channels of information and communication. communications infrastructure may be destroyed, and existing communication channels may be abused by those with specific agendas e.g. the spreading of rumours or hate messages, or the fabrication of stories to cover neglect of duties. Rumours and the absence of credible and accurate information tend to be major sources of anxiety for those affected by an emergency and can create confusion and insecurity. Moreover, a lack of knowledge about rights can lead to exploitation. appropriate information received at an appropriate time may counter this. a responsible mechanism should proactively disseminate such useful information. Information and communication systems can be designed to help community members play a part in recovery processes and thus be active survivors rather than passive victims. Information and communication technology IcT and traditional methods of communication and entertainment – such as sketches, songs and plays – can play a crucial role in disseminating information on survivors’ rights and entitlements, while appropriate information about relief and the whereabouts of displaced people can help to reunite families. In addition to the specific actions described below, ensuring good governance during emergencies through transparency, accountability and participation will help to improve access to information. Key actions 1. Facilitate the formation of an information and communication team. • If regular communication systems in terms of people and infrastructure are not fully functional, help to constitute a team of communicators to provide information on the emergency, relief efforts and legal rights and to strengthen the voices of marginalised or forgotten groups. The team may be drawn from local media organisations, community leaders, relief agencies, the government or other parties involved in the emergency response. Members of the affected community themselves may play a key role in disseminating information about services.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 158 Proofread by: Approved by: 2. Assess the situation regularly and identify key information gaps and key • Recurrence of emergency-related events e.g. violence or earthquake information for dissemination. aftershocks; • study available assessments and the challenges they highlight see action sheet 2.1. • analyse who controls channels of communication, asking whether particular groups are disseminating information in ways that advance specific agendas. • conduct, when necessary, further assessments that address the following questions: • Which communities/groups of people are on the move and which have settled? • The location and nature of different humanitarian services; • The location of safe spaces see action sheet 5.1 and the services available there see action sheets 5.1, 5.2, 5.4 and 7.1; • Key results of assessments and aid monitoring exercises; • Major decisions taken by political leaders and humanitarian coordination • Who are the people at risk: are they the commonly recognised vulnerable bodies; groups see chapter 1 or are they new ones? • Rights and entitlements e.g. quantity of rice that a displaced person is • are there reports of survivors who have lost mobility? If so, identify where entitled to, land rights, etc.. they are located and the existing response. • Monitor relevant information issued by governments or local authorities, in • Where can people locate themselves safely and which places are dangerous? particular information relating to relief packages. • If mental health and psychosocial supports are available, who is providing • ask different stakeholders in the population, as well as relief workers, about the key these supports? Which agencies are active in this area? are they covering information gaps that should be addressed e.g. lack of knowledge about services, all affected communities and segments of the population? are there sections of entitlements, location of family members, etc.. Work with survivors to identify the the community that have been left out? kind of messages they would like to disseminate and the appropriate way of doing • What opportunities exist to integrate information and communication this, anticipating the public impact it can have. campaigns with other, ongoing relief efforts? • Identify on an ongoing basis harmful media practices or abuses of information that • What is the level of literacy among men, women, children and adolescents in the population? should be addressed. such practices include: • Dissemination of prejudicial/hate messages; • Which pre-existing communication channels are functional? Which channels • aggressive questioning of people about their emotional experiences; would be the most effective in the current situation to carry messages related to the emergency, relief efforts and legal rights? • Which are the population groups that do not have access to media? • Which are the groups that have no access to media due to disability e.g. people with visual or hearing impairments? What methods may need to be developed for dissemination of information to reach out to such people? • collect and collate relevant information on a daily basis. This may include information relating to: • availability and safety of relief materials; • ceasefire agreements, safe zones and other peace initiatives; • Failure to organise access to psychosocial support for people who have been asked about their emotional experiences in the disaster; • stigmatising people by interviewing them in inappropriate ways; • Use of images, names or other personally identifying information without informed consent or in ways that endanger survivors. • Identify on an ongoing basis good media practices, such as: • Inviting experienced humanitarian workers in the area of MHPss to give advice through media; • Providing specific advice through news briefings.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 160 Proofread by: Approved by: 3. Develop a communication and campaign plan. e.g. avoid frequently repeating video clips of the worst moments of the disaster • Maximise community participation in the process of developing a communication by organising media briefings and field visits. Encourage media organisations and and campaign plan. • Develop a system to disseminate useful information that addresses gaps identified. • Educate local media organisations about potentially helpful and potentially harmful practices, and how to avoid the latter. • Respect principles of confidentiality and informed consent. journalists to avoid unnecessary use of images that are likely to cause extreme distress among viewers. In addition, encourage media outlets to carry not only images and stories of people in despair, but also to print or broadcast images and stories of resilience and the engagement of survivors in recovery efforts. • sustain local media interest by highlighting different angles, such as the various dimensions of mental health and psychosocial well-being, survivors’ recovery stories, the involvement of at-risk groups in recovery efforts and model response 4. Create channels to access and disseminate credible information to the initiatives. affected population. • Identify people in the affected population who are influential in disseminating • Disseminate messages on the rights and entitlements of survivors, such as disability laws, public health laws, entitlements related to land for reconstruction, relief information within communities. packages, etc. • Generate a media and communications directory, including: • consider preparing messages on international standards for humanitarian aid, • a list of local media with the names and contact details of key journalists such as the sphere Minimum standards. covering stories relating to health, children and human interest; • consider distribution methods that help people to access information e.g. batteries • a list of names and contact details of journalists who are covering the for radios, setting up billboards for street newspapers. emergency; • a directory of personnel in different humanitarian agencies working in 5. Ensure coordination between communication personnel working in different communications. • communication teams may create channels to disseminate information using local languages. This may include negotiating airtime on local radio stations or space on billboards at main road junctions and in other public places, or at schools, relief camps or toilet sites. • In the absence of any media, consider innovative mechanisms such as distributing radios. agencies. coordination is important to: • Ensure the consistency of information disseminated to the affected population; • Facilitate the development of inter-agency information platforms e.g. bulletin boards where survivors can go to receive all essential information, including information on positive ways of coping see action sheet 8.2. • Engage local people at every stage of the communication process, and make sure Key resources that messages are empathetic showing understanding of the situation of disaster survivors and uncomplicated i.e. understandable by local 12-year-olds. 1. ActionAid International forthcoming Mind Matters: Psychosocial Response in Emergencies video. 2. IASC 2003. Guidelines for HIV/AIDS Interventions in Emergency Settings. • Organise press briefings to give information about specific humanitarian activities Action Sheet 9.1: Provide information on HIV/AIDS prevention and care, pp.91-94. Geneva: IASC. planned to happen in the next few days i.e. what, when, where, who is organising the activity, etc. 3. OCHA forthcoming. Developing a Humanitarian Advocacy Strategy and Action Plan: • Ensure that there is no unnecessary repetition of past horrific events in local media A Step-by-Step Manual. 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 162 Proofread by: Approved by: 4. Office of the United Nations Secretary-General Special Envoy for Tsunami Recovery 2006. The Right to Know: The Challenge of Public Information and Accountability in Aceh and Sri Lanka. New York: United Nations. 5. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. action sheet 8.2 Provide access to information about positive coping methods domain: Dissemination of information Phase: Minimum response Geneva: Sphere Project. background 6. UNICEF 2005. Ethical Guidelines for Journalists: Principles for Ethical Reporting on Children. 7. UNICEF 2005. The Media and Children’s Rights Second Edition. New York: UNICEF. Sample process indicators • assessments are conducted to identify whether the affected population is receiving key information on the emergency, relief efforts and their legal rights. In emergency settings, most people experience psychological distress e.g. strong feelings of grief, sadness, fear or anger. In most situations, the majority of affected individuals will gradually start to feel better, especially if they use helpful ways of dealing with stress – i.e. positive coping methods – and if they receive support from their families and community. a helpful step in coping is having access to appropriate information related to the emergency, relief efforts and legal rights see action sheet 8.1 and about positive coping methods. Making available culturally appropriate educational information can be a useful means of encouraging positive coping methods. The aim of such information is • When there are gaps in key information, the relevant information is disseminated in to increase the capacity of individuals, families and communities to understand the a manner that is easily accessible and understandable by different sub-groups in the common ways in which most people tend to react to extreme stressors and to attend population. example: Gujarat earthquake, India, 2001 • National and international NGOs, together with local social action groups, organised a ‘Know your entitlements’ campaign. They compiled all government effectively to their own psychosocial needs and to those of others. Dissemination of information on positive coping methods through printed materials or via radio is one of the most frequently used emergency interventions, and has the potential to reach the vast majority of affected people. orders, demystified legal jargon and translated the material into simple, local- Key actions language information sheets. sheets provided questions and answers on key 1. Determine what information on positive coping methods is already available entitlements and instructions on how to apply for these. among the disaster-affected population. • street plays that communicated the entitlements of survivors were enacted by community volunteers. after each play, application forms were distributed, and applicants were supported by volunteers throughout the application process until they received their entitlements. • People’s tribunals were organised to enable survivors to register their grievances and to educate them about their entitlements. • coordinate with all relevant organisations to determine a whether culturally appropriate information on positive coping methods already exists and b the extent to which this information is known to the population. Key action 2 below provides guidance on determining whether the available information is appropriate. 2. If no information on positive coping methods is currently available, develop information on positive, culturally appropriate coping methods for use among the disaster-affected population. • coordinate and plan the development of information on positive coping methods with other organisations. Make sure that the messages are simple and consistent to  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 164 Proofread by: Approved by: avoid confusion. To the extent possible, reach an inter-agency consensus about the content of the information and agree on how to share tasks e.g. dissemination. • In developing appropriate materials, it is important to identify the range of expected individual and community reactions to severe stressors e.g. rape and to recognise culturally specific ways of coping e.g. prayers or rituals at times of difficulty. To avoid duplicate assessments, review results from existing assessments see action Do’s Don’ts Use simple, direct language. Invest the time and Do not use complicated or technical language energy needed to ensure that concepts are worded e.g. psychological/psychiatric terms. in a way that makes sense in the local context and can be understood by a local 12-year-old. Use colloquial expressions when these are clearer e.g. use local terminology for words such as sheets 2.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 6.4. Gaps in knowledge may be filled by interviewing ‘coping’. people knowledgeable about the local culture e.g. local anthropologists or by conducting focus groups. When selecting participants for focus groups, make sure that different age and gender groups within the community are appropriately represented. separate male and female groups are usually required to allow different perspectives to be heard. • It is important to recognise positive methods of coping that tend to be helpful across different cultures, such as: • seeking out social support • Providing structure to the day • Relaxation methods • Recreational activities • Gently facing feared situations perhaps along with a trusted companion, in order to gain control over daily activities. • Workers should familiarise themselves with helpful coping methods by reviewing examples of self-care information produced by other organisations or through focus group discussions with community members who are coping well. sometimes giving out messages about how to help others can be effective, as they encourage affected people to take care of others and, indirectly, of themselves. Focus on priorities identified by communities and Do not include too many messages at one time, as keep the message short, focused and concrete. this can confuse or overwhelm people. Point out that it is common to experience distress Do not include long lists of psychiatric symptoms after a stressful event and that people affected by in materials for the general population i.e. a disaster may notice changes in their feelings, materials used outside clinical settings. behaviour and thoughts. Emphasise that this is a common and understandable reaction to an abnormal event. Emphasise positive coping methods, solution- Do not emphasise psychological vulnerability in focused approaches and positive expectations of materials for the general population. recovery, and warn against harmful ways of coping e.g. heavy alcohol use. Aim to include community, family and individual coping strategies. State that most people will probably feel better Do not specify a precise timeframe for recovery over the coming weeks and months. If their e.g. ‘You will feel better in three weeks’ and do distress does not decrease over a period of weeks not suggest seeking professional help if such or if it becomes worse, they should seek help help is unavailable. from available community supports or seek professional help though only include this advice if such help is available. Provide information on how and where people can access these services. Ask members of the local community to review Do not literally translate written materials into a any materials developed. Ensure the accuracy of language that is not commonly used in a written • The following table offers specific guidance on ‘do’s and don’ts’ in developing translated materials. information for the general public on positive coping methods: format. It may be better to find a non-written format e.g. pictures, drawings, songs, dances, etc. or to translate the materials into a national written language that is understandable by at least one member of each household. This ‘do not’ applies to self-care materials directed to the general population outside clinical settings. Listing and explaining symptoms for materials developed for clinical care settings for those having a diagnosable mental disorder is often appropriate and part of treatment.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 166 Proofread by: Approved by: 3. Adapt the information to address the specific needs of sub-groups of the population as appropriate. • Different sub-groups within a population may also have particular ways of coping that are different from those of the general population. Develop separate information 2. International Catholic Migration Commission ICMC 2005. Setelah Musibah After Disaster. ICMC, Indonesia. on positive coping mechanisms for sub-groups as appropriate e.g. men, women, 3. World Health Organization 2005. Some Strategies to Help Families Cope with Stress. WHO, Pakistan. and other specific groups at risk: see chapter 1. consider including a special focus on ‘children’s coping’ and ‘teenagers’ coping’, noting in the latter that short-term coping methods such as drinking or taking drugs are likely to cause long-term harm. Sample process indicators 4. Develop and implement a strategy for effective dissemination of information. • although printed materials leaflets and posters are the most common method of disseminating information, other mechanisms such as radio, television, drawings/ pictures, songs, plays or street theatre may be more effective. Explore with community and religious leaders ways of delivering non-written information. The most appropriate form of delivery depends on the target group, literacy rates and the cultural context. For example, non-written materials e.g. comic books depicting well-known characters, drama may be more effective in communicating with children. a combination of dissemination methods conveying consistent messages may be used to maximise reach within the general population. • ask permission to place copies of written materials in community institutions such as churches, mosques, schools and health clinics and on noticeboards in camps. It is helpful to place materials in areas where people can pick them up with appropriate privacy. • some NGOs have found that talking to people while providing them with a handout/leaflet is more effective than simply leaving handouts for collection, as often people will not read them. • If possible, make a copy of written materials available on the internet. While most disaster survivors will not have access to the web, disseminating materials in this way enables them to be shared among organisations, which in turn can increase distribution see also action sheet 8.1. Key resources 1. American Red Cross 2004. From Crisis to Recovery, the Road to Resiliency: A Small Pocket Manual. American Red Cross Psychosocial Group, New Delhi. • self-care information that is disseminated has a focus on positive coping methods. • Estimated proportion of population that has access to the disseminated information. • Information that is disseminated is culturally appropriate and understandable to most of the population. example: Aceh, Indonesia, 2005 • after reviewing existing self-care materials, national staff from an international NGO were trained to conduct focus groups to identify what people were going through common reactions and what activities people used to cope with the stress. • an artist was contracted to draw pictures depicting people from aceh in local dress, portraying concepts that the community had identified. another set of pictures illustrated the deep breathing relaxation technique. • The brochures were explained and distributed during community gatherings, e.g. after evening prayers at the mosque. Brochures were also distributed to other organisations, which in turn distributed them through their intervention programmes. • Through the psychosocial coordination group, agencies jointly continued producing newsletters with information that represented the concerns of tsunami- affected communities and local civil society. a local NGO was funded and supervised to continue producing relevant newsletters.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 168 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 9.1 Include specific social and psychological considerations safe aid for all in dignity, considering cultural practices and household roles in the provision of food and nutritional support domain: Food security and nutrition Phase: Minimum response background In many emergencies, hunger and food insecurity cause severe stress and damage the psychosocial well-being of the affected population. conversely, the psychosocial effects of an emergency can impair food security and nutritional status. Understanding the interactions between psychosocial well-being and food/nutritional security see table below enables humanitarian actors to increase the quality and effectiveness of food aid and nutritional support programmes while also supporting human dignity. Ignoring these interactions causes harm, resulting for example in programmes that require people to queue up for long hours to receive food, treat recipients as dehumanised, passive consumers, or create the conditions for violence in and around food deliveries. table: Social and psychological factors relevant to food aid Factors relevant to food aid Type of effect and examples General social factors including • Marginalisation of particular groups, reducing their access pre-existing factors related to food to scarce resources security and nutritional status • Socio-cultural aspects of diet and nutrition dietary beliefs and practices: what food is eaten; how food is cultivated, harvested, distributed, prepared, served and eaten; cultural taboos Emergency-related social and • Disruption of gender, household and family roles e.g. deaths psychological factors that affect food of income earners Factors relevant to food aid Type of effect and examples • Reduced capacity of individuals to provide food to dependants e.g. due to severe depression • Severe disorientation that prevents or inhibits individuals from accessing food e.g. due to severe mental or neurological disorder • Fear that prevents individuals or groups from accessing food e.g. due to misinformation, political persecution or supernatural beliefs related to emergency • Loss of appetite e.g. due to severe grief after the loss of family members Impact of hunger and food insecurity • Serious mental or cognitive disabilities, especially in young on mental health and psychosocial children e.g. due to chronic nutritional deficits, lack of social/ well-being emotional stimulation • Harmful coping strategies e.g. selling important assets, exchanging sex for food, taking children out of school, abandoning weaker family members such as a child • Breakdown of law and order e.g. fighting over resources • Loss of hope or perspective for the future e.g. in situations of protracted armed conflict • Feelings of helplessness and resignation e.g. after loss of livelihood • Aggressive behaviour e.g. in situations of perceived unfairness of food entitlement or distribution The sphere Handbook outlines the overall standards for food security, nutrition and food aid in emergencies. The key actions described below give guidance on social and psychological considerations relevant to working towards such standards. security and nutritional status • Disorientation and/or disruption of formal and informal community leadership e.g. death of a community leader who could organise assistance • Disruption of informal social networks that assist at-risk people e.g. volunteers providing care to bed-ridden people Key actions 1. Assess psychosocial factors related to food security, nutrition and food aid. • Review available assessment data on food and nutrition and on mental health and psychosocial support see action sheet 2.1. If necessary, initiate further assessment • Lack of security e.g. attacks on women who collect fuel wood on key social and psychological factors relevant to food and nutritional support see table above.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 170 Proofread by: Approved by: • Food and nutrition assessment reports should be shared with relevant coordination 4. Implement food aid in a culturally appropriate manner that protects the identity, groups see action sheets 1.1 and 2.1 and should indicate: integrity and dignity of primary stakeholders. • How and to what extent food insecurity/malnutrition affects mental health and psychosocial well-being, and vice versa see also sphere general nutrition support standard 2 on at-risk groups and sphere assessment and analysis • Respect religious and cultural practices related to food items and food preparation, provided that these practices respect human rights and help to restore human identity, integrity and dignity. standards 1–2 on food security and nutrition; • avoid discrimination, recognising that local cultural norms and traditions may • Which psychological and socio-cultural factors should be considered in the planning, implementation and follow-up of food aid and nutritional interventions. 2. Maximise participation in the planning, distribution and follow-up of food aid. • Enable broad and meaningful participation of target communities during assessment, planning, distribution and follow-up see action sheet 5.1. • Maximise the participation of at-risk, marginalised and less visible groups see chapter 1. • Make the participation of women a high priority in all phases of food aid. In most discriminate against particular groups, such as women. Food aid planners have the responsibility to identify discrimination and ensure that food aid reaches all intended recipients. • Provide suitable, acceptable food together with any condiments and cooking utensils that may have special cultural significance see also sphere food aid planning standards 1–2. • share important information in suitable ways see action sheet 8.1. If food items are unfamiliar to the recipients, provide instructions for their correct preparation. societies women are the household food managers and play a positive role in 5. Collaborate with health facilities and other support structures for referral. ensuring that food aid reaches all intended recipients without undesired consequences. • consider using food assistance to create and/or restore informal social protection networks by, for example, distributing food rations via volunteers providing home-based care see also action sheet 3.2. 3. Maximise security and protection in the implementation of food aid. • Pay special attention to the risk that food is misused for political purposes or that distributions marginalise particular people or increase conflict. • avoid poor planning, inadequate registration procedures and failure to share information, which may create tensions and sometimes result in violence or riots. • Take all possible measures to guard against the misuse of food aid and to prevent abuse, including the trading of food for sex by aid workers or persons in similar positions see action sheet 4.2 and action sheet 6.1 of iasc Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence interventions in Humanitarian settings. • Use food and nutrition programmes as a possible entry point for identifying individuals or groups who urgently need social or psychological support. • For specific guidance on facilitating stimulation for young children in food crises, see the WHO 2006 reference under Key resources. • Ensure that workers in food aid and nutrition programmes know where and how to refer people in acute social or psychological distress. • Raise awareness among the affected population and food workers that certain micronutrient deficiencies can impair children’s cognitive development and harm foetal development. • Help food aid and nutrition workers to understand the medical implications of severe malnutrition. • Identify health risks and refer people who are at risk of moderate or acute malnutrition to special facilities supplementary or therapeutic feeding centres respectively; see also sphere correction of malnutrition standards 1–3; and action sheet 5.4. • Give pregnant and lactating women special attention regarding the prevention of 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 172 Proofread by: Approved by: micronutrient deficiencies. • consider the potential appropriateness of introducing school feeding programmes to address the risk of malnourishment in children see action sheet 7.1. • Food aid coordinators link up with psychosocial coordination mechanisms and take an active role in communicating relevant information to the field. example: Afghanistan, 2002 6. Stimulate community discussion for long-term food security planning. • an international NGO provided food aid to 10,000 war-affected widows, some Because food aid is only one way to promote food security and nutrition, consider of whom had severe psychological issues such as depression and were unable to alternatives such as: function well as sole breadwinners. • Direct cash transfers, cash-for-work and income-generating activities; • The NGO partnered with another agency that specialised in counselling, referred • community-driven food and livelihood security programmes which reduce the severely affected women for support and continued to include the women in helplessness and resignation and engage the community in socio-economic the food aid programme. • Representatives of the affected population participated in planning and monitoring the food distributions, helping to make adjustments that promoted local people’s dignity and identity. recovery efforts. Key resources 1. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP 2003. ‘Participation and food security’. In: Participation by Crisis-Affected Populations in Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners, pp.231-275. 2. Engle P. 1999. ‘The Role of Caring Practices and Resources for Care in Child Survival, Growth, and Development: South and Southeast Asia’. In: Asian Development Review, vol. 17 nos. 1, 2, pp.132-167. 3. IASC 2005. Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings. Action Sheet 6.1: Implement safe food security and nutrition programmes, pp.50-52. Geneva: IASC. 4. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. Minimum Standards in Food Security, Nutrition and Food Aid, pp.103-203. Geneva: Sphere Project. 5. WHO 2006. Mental Health And Psychosocial Well-Being Among Children In Severe Food Shortage Situations. Geneva: WHO. Sample process indicators • Food aid and nutrition assessments and programme planning efforts include social and psychological dimensions. • Effective mechanisms exist for reporting and addressing security issues associated with food aid and nutrition.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 174 Proofread by: Approved by: action sheet 10.1 Include specific social considerations safe, dignified, culturally and socially appropriate assistance in site planning and shelter provision, in a coordinated manner domain: shelter and site planning Phase: Minimum response background The provision of safe, adequate shelter in emergencies saves lives, reduces morbidity and enables people to live in dignity without excessive distress. The participation of people affected by an emergency in decisions regarding shelter and site planning reduces the helplessness seen in many camps or shelter areas, promotes people’s well- being see action sheet 5.1, and helps to ensure that all family members have access to culturally appropriate shelter. The engagement of women in the planning and design of emergency and interim shelters is vital to ensure attention to gender needs, privacy and protection. The participation of displaced people also promotes self- reliance, builds community spirit and encourages local management of facilities and Key actions 1. Use a participatory approach that engages women and people at risk in assessment, planning and implementation. • conduct participatory assessments see action sheet 2.1 with a broad range of affected people, including those at special risk see chapter 1. • Focus initial assessments on core issues, such as the cultural requirements for shelter; where cooking is done and, if inside, how ventilation is provided; privacy issues and proximity to neighbours; accessibility to latrines for those with restricted mobility; how much light is required if income-generating activities are to be carried out inside; etc. • Identify the best solution to shelter problems for everyone in the community, aiming to reduce potential distress and worry for the inhabitants. • Organise support for people who are unable to build their own shelters. infrastructure. 2. Select sites that protect security and minimise conflict with permanent residents. a range of shelter or camp options should be explored in an emergency. Initial • consult with local government and neighbouring communities to ensure that the decisions on the location and layout of sites, including self-settled camps, can have land chosen is not already used by the local community for grazing or crop long-term effects on protection and the delivery of humanitarian assistance. although production and to understand other land tenure issues. camps or collective centres are often the only option, displaced people, in certain situations, may be hosted with local families who provide shelter and social support. This is a useful option provided that services to the hosting families are strengthened. The organisation of sites and shelters can have a significant impact on well- being, which is reduced by overcrowding and the lack of privacy commonly found in camps and other settings. Mental health and psychosocial problems can arise when people are isolated from their own family/community group or are forced to live surrounded by people they do not know, who speak other languages or who arouse fear and suspicion. also at risk are people such as the elderly, single women, people with disabilities and child-headed households, who are not in a position to build, rent or secure their own shelter. conflicts among displaced people or between displaced people and host communities over scarce resources such as space or water can often be a significant problem, and site planning must minimise such potential risks. The sphere Handbook outlines important guidance and overall standards for shelter and settlement in emergencies. The key actions outlined below give guidance on social considerations relevant in working towards such standards. • Ensure that the site identification and selection process includes an environmental survey that analyses the natural resource base in the area and guides proper environmental management. Failure to do this can cause environmental degradation and distress stemming from a lack of natural resources for eating, drinking and cooking. a survey also helps to ensure that permanent residents’ access to these resources is not at risk. • consult women in particular about privacy and security, including safe, ready access to local resources e.g. firewood for cooking and heating and the location of latrines for guidance see the iasc Guidelines for Gender-based Violence interventions in Humanitarian settings. If centralised cooking facilities must be provided, they should be located close to shelters. • select and design sites that enable ready and safe access to communal services e.g. health facilities, food distribution points, water points, markets, schools, places of worship, community centres, fuel sources, recreational areas and solid waste disposal areas.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 176 Proofread by: Approved by: 3. Include communal safe spaces in site design and implementation. 7. Balance flexibility and protection in organising shelter and site arrangements. Develop communal safe spaces that offer psychological assurance and enable social, • Recognise that camps are necessary in some situations; however, displaced people cultural, religious and educational activities see action sheets 5.1 and 3.2 and the often prefer to live with host families in their own makeshift dwellings, or dissemination of information see action sheet 8.1. These safe spaces should include sometimes they may choose hotels, schools or other available communal buildings. child-friendly spaces where children can meet and play see action sheets 5.4 and 7.1. • Enable people to choose to the extent possible their own shelter arrangements, neighbours and living areas. This helps people to live according to their own goals, 4. Develop and use an effective system of documentation and registration. culture and values and to regain a sense of control and livelihood opportunities, all concerned actors should agree on a common registration and individual all of which support psychosocial well-being. documentation system that assists site planners in designing layout and shelter plans, while protecting the confidentiality of data. The documentation system should include provision for age- and gender-disaggregated data. 5. Distribute shelter and allocate land in a non-discriminatory manner. • Map the diversity age groups, gender, ethnic groups, etc. among the affected population in order to address the needs of each group, as appropriate. • Ensure that shelter distribution and land allocation to all families and households occur in a non-discriminatory manner, without preference based on ethnicity, gender, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. 6. Maximise privacy, ease of movement and social support. • Emphasise family-size shelters that maximise privacy and promote visibility and ease of movement. If large emergency shelters are used, include partitions to increase privacy and reduce noise. • Ensure that people can move easily through group shelters or around family • caution people against living in unsafe conditions if safer alternatives exist. 8. Avoid creating a culture of dependency among displaced people and promote durable solutions. • Establish large-scale camps or semi-permanent camps only when absolutely necessary and ensure, where possible, that there is a proper balance between safety and distance from the area of origin. • Use familiar and locally available construction materials that allow families to make their own repairs and avoid dependency on external aid, as this can help to avoid distress. • Encourage early return and resettlement of displaced people as a durable solution and provide support to those families who want to return to their areas of origin and are able to do so. • Ensure that services are provided not only in camps but also in return areas. • care should be taken to ensure that supportive social structures are kept intact. dwellings without invading the privacy of other people or causing significant Key resources disruption. 1. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP • Whenever possible, avoid separating people who wish to be together with members 2003. ‘Participatory Habitat and Shelter Programmes’. In Participation by Crisis-Affected Populations of their family, village, or religious or ethnic group. • Enable reunited families to live together. • Facilitate provision of shelter for isolated, vulnerable individuals who are living alone due to mental disorder or disability. in Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners, pp. 295-314. 2. IASC 2005. Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings. Action Sheets 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 on settlement and shelter, pp.53-60. Geneva: IASC. 3. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 178 Proofread by: Approved by: Minimum Standards in Shelter, Settlement and Non-Food Items, pp.203-249. Geneva: Sphere Project. action sheet 11.1 Include specific social considerations safe and culturally appropriate access for all in dignity in the provision of water and sanitation 4. UN Habitat 2003. Toolkit for Mainstreaming Gender in UN-Habitat Field Programmes. domain: Water and sanitation Phase: Minimum response 5. UNHCR Handbook for Emergencies 2000. Chapter 1. background 6. UNHCR Environmental Guidelines 2005. www.unhcr.org/environment In emergencies, providing access to clean drinking water and safe, culturally 7. UNHCR Tool for Participatory Assessment in Operations 2006. appropriate hygiene and sanitation facilities are high priorities, not only for survival but also for restoring a sense of dignity. The manner in which humanitarian assistance 8. Women’s Commission on Refugee Women and Children 2006. ‘Beyond firewood: Fuel alternatives and protection strategies for displaced women and girls’. Sample process indicators • Local people, particularly women, participate in the design and layout of shelter and in selecting the materials used for construction. • People who are unable to build their own shelters receive support in shelter construction. is provided has a significant impact on the affected population. The engagement of local people in a participatory approach helps to build community cohesion and enables people to regain a sense of control. Depending on how they are provided, water and sanitation watsan supports can either improve or harm mental health and psychosocial well-being. In some emergencies, poorly lit, unlocked latrines have become sites of gender-based violence, including rape, whereas in others, conflict at water sources has become a significant source of distress. Part of the stress experienced in relation to watsan provision has cultural origins. In afghanistan, for example, girls and women have reported that the lack of separate women’s latrines is a major concern, since the exposure of any • shelter is organised in a manner that maximises privacy and minimises part of their bodies is punishable and could shame and dishonour their families. overcrowding. The sphere Handbook outlines the overall standards for water and sanitation provision in emergencies. The key actions outlined below give guidance on social example: liberia, 2004 and east timor, 2006 considerations relevant in working towards such standards. • In East Timor in 2006, Liberia 2004 and several other emergencies, the privacy of displaced people was increased by grouping 10–20 family shelters in Key actions a U shape around a common area. • To reinforce privacy, shelters were placed at an angle to one another. No front door of a shelter directly faced another, and no shelter blocked the direct view of another shelter. Each shelter opened onto the common area, which included cooking and recreational areas and retained trees for shade and environmental protection, and which the community cleaned. • Each shelter had a private backyard area used for storage, laundry, kitchen gardening, cooking etc. Water points and latrines were located nearby and were kept visible from the common area to prevent the risk of GBV. 1. Include social and cultural issues in water and sanitation and hygiene promotion assessments. In many countries, strict cultural norms and taboos influence the usage of latrines and the disposal of human excreta. Inattention to cultural norms can lead to the construction of latrines or water points that are never used. In some cases, water points or latrines are not used because they may have been used to dispose of dead bodies. attention to social and cultural norms will help to minimise the distress of adjusting to unfamiliar surroundings and different ways of performing daily tasks. For these reasons, assessment teams should not only have core watsan technical expertise but should also be familiar with the psychosocial aspects of emergency response.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 180 Proofread by: Approved by: 2. Enable participation in assessment, planning and implementation, especially • consider trying to reduce conflict between neighbouring displaced groups or engaging women and other people at risk. between displaced and permanent residents by encouraging the conflicting groups • Involve members of the affected population, especially women, people with to cooperate in building a common well. disabilities and elderly people, in decisions on the siting and design of latrines and, if possible, of water points and bathing shelters. This may not always be possible due to the speed with which facilities have to be provided, but community consultation should be the norm rather than the exception. • Establish a body to oversee watsan work. a useful means of doing this is to facilitate the formation of gender-balanced water committees that consist of local people selected by the community and that include representatives from various sub-groups of the affected population. • Encourage water committees to a work proactively to restore dignified watsan provision, b reduce dependency on aid agencies and c create a sense of ownership 5. Promote personal and community hygiene. • Provide access for women to menstrual cloths or other materials the lack of which creates significant stress and to appropriate space for washing and drying them. consult women on the need for special areas for washing menstrual cloths, and provide technical assistance with their design. Where existing water supplies cannot support washing, alternative sanitary materials should be provided for guidance, see action sheet 7.4 of the Iasc Guidelines for Gender-based Violence interventions in Humanitarian settings. • Encourage community clean-up campaigns and communication about basic hygiene. conducive to proper use and maintenance of the facilities. consider incentives for • Distribute soap and other hygiene articles, in accordance with advice received water committees and user fees, remembering that both have potential advantages from women, men and children, including disabled and elderly people. and disadvantages and need careful evaluation in the local context. • Initiate child-to-child watsan activities that are interactive and fun, such as group hand-washing before meals. These activities can be done in schools or in child- 3. Promote safety and protection in all water and sanitation activities. friendly spaces if these are functioning. • Ensure that adequate water points are close to and accessible to all households, including those of vulnerable people such as those with restricted mobility. 6. Facilitate community monitoring of, and feedback on, water and sanitation facilities. • Make waiting times sufficiently short so as not to interfere with essential activities • Enable community monitoring to track safety and to identify and respond to such as children’s school attendance. • Ensure that all latrines and bathing areas are secure and, if possible, well-lit. Providing male and female guards and torches or lamps are simple ways of improving security. • Ensure that latrines and bathing shelters are private and culturally acceptable and that wells are covered and pose no risk to children. 4. Prevent and manage conflict in a constructive manner. • When there is an influx of displaced people, take steps to avoid the reduction of water supplies available to host communities and the resulting strain on resources. community concerns. Ensure that a feedback mechanism exists for stakeholders to report problems or concerns to the water committee or to relevant agencies responsible for watsan activities. This same mechanism can be used to keep the affected population informed as to what facilities and services they can expect. • Monitor that sites and facilities are clean and well maintained, as having clean facilities helps to restore stakeholders’ dignity. • ask the affected population, including children and people at risk see chapter 1, about their perceptions of access to, and quality of, watsan supports and also about their concerns and suggestions. • Prevent conflicts at water sites by asking water committees or other community groups to develop a system for preventing and managing conflict e.g. by rotating Key resources access times between families. 1. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action ALNAP 2003. ‘Participation and water/sanitation programmes’. In: Participation by Crisis-Affected Populations 0 iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings action sheets for Minimum Response  ISAC Guidelines: Version mech 5.0 06/14/07 Page No. 182 Proofread by: Approved by: in Humanitarian Action: A Handbook for Practitioners, pp.275-294. 2. IASC 2005. Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings. Action Sheet 7.4: Provide sanitary materials to women and girls, p.61. Geneva: IASC. 3. Jones H. and Reed B. 2005. Access to Water and Sanitation for Disabled People and Other Vulnerable Groups. 4. Sphere Project 2004. Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. Minimum Standards in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion, pp.51-102. Geneva: Sphere Project. 5. UNHCR. 2000. Handbook for Emergencies. 6. University of Wisconsin, Emergency Settlement Project 1996. Topic 14 – Environmental Health: Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Vector Management. Sample process indicators • In a monthly focus group discussion, more than two-thirds of women express satisfaction with the safety and privacy of the sanitation facilities provided. • Water committees that include women and men are in place and meet regularly. • There is no reported conflict between host and displaced communities. example: Pakistan, 2005 • During the earthquake response in the North-West Frontier Province in 2005, an international NGO built special covered areas for women where they could go to the latrine, bathe and wash children, clothes and menstrual cloths without being seen by outsiders. • These spaces enabled women to meet and talk in a safe environment that took cultural norms into consideration. • The women said this greatly reduced the stress and anxiety of living in a displaced persons camp.  iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings Iasc Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support in Emergency settings The IASC Guidelines for Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings reflect the insights of numerous agencies and practitioners worldwide and provide valuable information to organisations and individuals on how to respond appropriately during humanitarian emergencies. specific action sheets offer useful guidance on mental health and psychosocial support, and cover the following areas: coordination assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation Protection and Human Rights standards Human Resources community Mobilisation and support Health services Education Dissemination of Information Food security and Nutrition shelter and site Planning Water and sanitation The Guidelines include a matrix, with guidance for emergency planning, actions to be taken in the early stages of an emergency and comprehensive responses needed in the recovery and rehabilitation phases. The matrix is a valuable tool for use in coordination, collaboration and advocacy efforts. It provides a framework for mapping the extent to which essential first responses are being implemented during an emergency. The Guidelines include a companion cD-ROM, which contains the full Guidelines and also resource documents in electronic format. Published by the Inter-agency standing committee Iasc, the Guidelines give humanitarian actors useful inter-agency, inter-sectoral guidance and tools for responding effectively in the midst of emergencies. I a s c G u i d e l i n e s o n M e n t a l H e a l t h a n d P s y c h o s o c i a l s u p p o r t i n E m e r g e n c y s e t t i n g s